= C01 — Flashing Firmware =

'''Track:''' Firmware & Configuration  
'''Prerequisites:''' None (standalone reference module)  
'''Audience:''' All levels  
'''Estimated reading time:''' 10 minutes

----

== Do You Need This Module? ==

'''Probably not.''' Boards purchased from the EVBMW webshop come pre-programmed and ready to use. You do not need to flash firmware before first use on a new board.

You need this module if:
* You have a blank/unprogrammed board
* The web interface shows <code>firmware: null</code>
* A firmware update failed partway through and the board is unresponsive
* You want to run a specific firmware version

----

== Know Your Chip ==

Before doing anything with firmware, identify which microcontroller is on your board.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Chip || ! Markings || ! Notes
|-
| **STM32F107** || | ST logo + STM32F107 || | Standard chip — use main firmware branch
|-
| **GD32F107** || | GD logo + GD32F107 || | Pandemic-era substitute — requires separate firmware branch
|}

The GD32F107 ("GD chip") was used on some boards produced during the 2021–2022 semiconductor shortage. A separate firmware branch (<code>GD_Zombie</code>) exists on GitHub but development was abandoned shortly after release. As of the current main firmware (V2.20A), the GD branch has substantially diverged and is not kept up to date. '''If you have a GD board, you are limited to an older firmware version and will miss recent features.'''

If you are unsure which chip you have, look at the main IC on the board under good lighting. The manufacturer logo and chip number are printed on the chip.

----

== Normal Firmware Update (Web Interface) ==

For routine firmware updates on a working board, use the web interface. No external tools required.

'''Steps:'''
# Download the latest firmware <code>.bin</code> file from the [https://github.com/damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu/releases GitHub releases page]
# Connect to the VCU via Wi-Fi
# Navigate to <code>192.168.4.1</code> in your browser
# Find the '''UART Update''' field in the interface
# Select your <code>.bin</code> file
# Upload and wait for the update to complete

'''Important notes:'''
* The file must be named <code>stm32_vcu.bin</code> — rename it if it has a version suffix
* Windows 10 has known reliability issues with the UART update method. If you are on Windows 10, consider using Ubuntu (WSL2 is fine) or switching to the ST-Link method if the UART update fails
* Do not power-cycle the board mid-update

'''Verifying success:'''
After reboot, connect to the web interface and check the firmware version displayed at the top of the page. If it shows <code>firmware: null</code>, the update failed and you will need to use the ST-Link recovery method below.

----

== Full Recovery via ST-Link (Bricked Board) ==

Use this method if:
* The web interface shows <code>firmware: null</code>
* The board is completely unresponsive (no Wi-Fi, <code>acty</code> LED not flashing)
* UART update failed and board will not boot

=== What You Need ===
* ST-Link V2 dongle (cheap clones from Amazon/AliExpress work, though results vary)
* STM32CubeProgrammer software (free, from ST Microelectronics)
* Bootloader <code>.hex</code> file (from [https://github.com/jsphuebner/tumanako-inverter-fw-bootloader/releases Johannes Huebner's bootloader repo])
* Latest ZombieVerter firmware <code>.hex</code> file (from [https://github.com/damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu/releases/ Damien's GitHub releases])
* 12V power supply for the VCU

: Use <code>.hex</code> files for ST-Link flashing (not <code>.bin</code>). The <code>.hex</code> format includes address information so STM32CubeProgrammer places the data correctly without you needing to manually specify flash addresses.

=== Procedure ===

# '''Download STM32CubeProgrammer''' from the ST website and install it
# '''Upgrade your ST-Link firmware''' using STM32CubeProgrammer — not strictly required but recommended
# '''Disconnect the Wi-Fi module''' from the VCU board (gently pull the ESP8266 module from its socket) — this eliminates one potential source of interference during flashing
# '''Connect ST-Link to the VCU SWD test points:'''

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
ST-Link pin    →    VCU test point
SWCLK          →    C
GND            →    G
SWDIO          →    D
</syntaxhighlight>

# '''Apply 12V power''' to the VCU (Pins 55 and 56) — the ST-Link alone does not power the board
# '''Open STM32CubeProgrammer''' and connect to the device via the ST-Link interface — you should see the chip detected
# '''Perform a full chip erase''' — this wipes all existing flash content including any corrupted firmware
# '''Flash the bootloader''' <code>.hex</code> file first
# '''Flash the firmware''' <code>.hex</code> file second
# '''Disconnect the ST-Link'''
# '''Reconnect the Wi-Fi module'''
# Power cycle the VCU and verify the Wi-Fi access point appears and the web interface loads

=== If STM32CubeProgrammer Cannot Connect ===
* Check your SWD wiring — SWCLK and SWDIO are often swapped
* Try a different ST-Link clone — quality varies widely
* Ensure 12V is present on the VCU before attempting to connect
* Try with the Wi-Fi module disconnected if you haven't already

----

== Serial Connection Parameters ==

If you use a serial terminal to communicate with the VCU (for diagnostics or the serial parameter interface):

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
Baud rate:  115200
Data bits:  8
Parity:     None
Stop bits:  2   ← This is unusual! Most tools default to 1 stop bit.
Flow ctrl:  None
</syntaxhighlight>

The 2 stop bits is a common gotcha — if your serial terminal is not receiving coherent data, check the stop bit setting first.

----

== Firmware Sources ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! What || ! Where
|-
| Latest stable firmware (`.bin` and `.hex`) || | github.com/damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu/releases
|-
| Bootloader (`.hex`) || | github.com/jsphuebner/tumanako-inverter-fw-bootloader/releases
|-
| GD32F107 firmware (older, unsupported) || | github.com/damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu/tree/GD_Zombie
|-
| STM32CubeProgrammer || | st.com/en/development-tools/stm32cubeprog.html
|}

Always use a released version unless you have a specific reason to build from source. The GitHub releases page lists changelogs so you can see what changed between versions.

----

== Building From Source (Advanced) ==

If you want to compile your own firmware from the repository:

<syntaxhighlight lang="bash">
git clone --recurse-submodules git@github.com:damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu.git
</syntaxhighlight>

The <code>--recurse-submodules</code> flag is critical — it pulls in <code>libopeninv</code> and other dependencies. Without it, the build will fail with missing includes.

GD32F107 boards require specific code modifications — see the forum thread linked in the wiki before attempting to compile for a GD board.

----

== What's Next ==

* '''C02''' — The Web Interface Walkthrough: navigating the UI once the board is running
* '''C03''' — Essential Parameters: First Start

----

''Source: openinverter.org/wiki/ZombieVerter_VCU | openinverter.org/wiki/Zombieverter_programing''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''
