= A01 — Regen Tuning =

'''Track:''' Advanced  
'''Prerequisites:''' C03 — Essential Parameters: First Start, C04 — Throttle Calibration  
'''Audience:''' Intermediate  
'''Firmware minimum:''' V2.15A (April 2024) — regen was not reliably functional before this release  
'''Estimated reading time:''' 12 minutes

----

== Important Firmware Note ==

: '''Regen was not reliably implemented until V2.15A (April 2024).''' Any content — videos, forum posts, tutorials — about ZombieVerter regen from before April 2024 refers to a non-functional or experimental implementation. Do not follow pre-V2.15A regen instructions.
>
: V2.20A (December 2024) added <code>revRegen</code> — control of regen behaviour in the reverse direction.

----

== How Regen Works on the ZombieVerter ==

Regen reverses the normal energy flow. Instead of the battery powering the motor, the motor acts as a generator — converting kinetic energy (vehicle momentum) back into electrical energy and pushing it into the battery.

The VCU triggers regen by sending a '''negative torque command''' to the inverter. From the inverter's perspective, it's the same as a forward torque command but in the opposite direction. The inverter's control loops handle the actual energy reversal.

There are two distinct regen mechanisms:

'''Throttle-lift regen''' — triggered by lifting the throttle. When <code>throtmin</code> is set to a negative value (e.g. -5), lifting the throttle produces a light braking effect rather than pure coast.

'''Brake regen''' — triggered by the brake pedal signal. Additional regen on top of (or instead of) throttle-lift regen when the brake is pressed.

----

== The Key Parameters ==

=== Complete Regen Parameter Reference ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Parameter || ! Default || ! Range || ! Description
|-
| `throtmin` || | -100% || | -100 to 0 || | Minimum (most negative) potnom allowed at all times — sets throttle-lift regen level
|-
| `regenmax` || | -10% || | -35 to 0 || | Maximum regen as a potnom percentage, scaled by motor RPM
|-
| `regenrpm` || | 1500 rpm || | 100–10000 || | RPM at which `regenmax` is fully applied. Below this, regen tapers to 0 at 100 rpm
|-
| `regenendrpm` || | 100 rpm || | 100–10000 || | Below this RPM, regen is zero — prevents regen stall
|-
| `regenBrake` || | -10% || | -35 to 0 || | Brake pedal regen — negative potnom applied when brake pressed, scaled by RPM
|-
| `regenramp` || | 1 %/10ms || | 0.1–100 || | Ramp speed entering regen. At 1, reaching -30% braking takes 300ms
|-
| `RegenBrakeLight` || | -15% || | -100 to 0 || | Potnom threshold below which the brake light output activates
|-
| `revRegen` || | Off || | On/Off || | Whether regen is active in reverse direction (V2.20A+)
|}

=== throtmin — Throttle-Lift Regen ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! throtmin value || ! Effect
|-
| 0 (default) || | No regen on throttle lift — pure coast
|-
| -5 || | Light one-pedal style regen
|-
| -20 || | Moderate regen — noticeable engine-brake feel
|-
| -50 || | Strong regen — aggressive deceleration on throttle lift
|}

Start conservative (e.g. -5) and increase gradually. Aggressive regen values feel unnatural and can be unsettling for passengers who aren't expecting strong deceleration on every throttle lift.

: Damien's personal preference for his E39 GS450h build: "I'm not a huge fan of regen myself" — but notes that many builders want it for practical range extension and one-pedal driving feel.

=== regenmax and RPM tapering ===

<code>regenmax</code> is not applied flat — the VCU tapers it based on motor RPM. At <code>regenrpm</code> (default 1500) the full value applies. Below <code>regenendrpm</code> (default 100 rpm) regen is zero. This prevents regen stall at low speed and jerky stops.

=== Brake pedal regen — regenBrake ===

Separate from throttle-lift regen. Applies additional negative potnom when the brake pedal input (Pin 49) is active. Useful for stronger blended braking feel without making throttle-lift too aggressive. Default is -10% — same as <code>regenmax</code>.

=== RegenBrakeLight ===

Sets the potnom threshold below which the brake light output activates during regen. Default -15% means the brake lights come on when regen exceeds 15% — ensures following drivers see brake lights during meaningful deceleration, even with no mechanical braking.

=== brakelight output ===

Assign the <code>BrakeLight</code> output function to a digital output pin in the Dout section. Without this, regen deceleration happens without brake lights — a safety concern.

=== revRegen (V2.20A+) ===

Controls whether regen is active in reverse direction. Some builds need regen in reverse (regenerative downhill reverse), others don't. Toggle on or off.

----

== Drivetrain-Specific Regen Behaviour ==

Regen behaviour varies by inverter type. This is why pre-V2.15A regen was unreliable — each drivetrain handles negative torque commands differently, and the VCU firmware needed per-drivetrain tuning.

'''Nissan Leaf inverter:''' Regen works well in V2.15A+. The Leaf motor and inverter were designed for aggressive regen in the OEM vehicle (e-Pedal). Supports strong negative torque values.

'''GS450h transaxle:''' Regen via MG2 works in V2.15A+. The automatic gear shifting (added V2.15A) accounts for regen: it downshifts before regen engages at low speeds to avoid drivetrain shock. Damien notes the downshift during regen deceleration on his E39.

'''Prius Gen3:''' Regen supported.

'''Outlander:''' Regen supported from V2.15A.

----

== Tuning Process ==

=== Step 1 — Start with throttle-lift only ===

Set <code>throtmin</code> = -5. Drive at moderate speed and lift the throttle gently. You should feel a light braking effect. Watch <code>idc</code> in Spot Values (via OBD or web interface) — it should go negative (current flowing back into battery) when regen is active.

If <code>idc</code> stays at zero or positive: regen is not working. Check firmware version is V2.15A+, check that <code>throtmin</code> is saved to flash, verify that <code>throtmax</code> is not zero.

=== Step 2 — Increase gradually ===

Increase <code>throtmin</code> by -5 increments. At each step, test the feel:
* Does the deceleration feel proportional to throttle lift?
* Does it come on smoothly or with a jerk?
* Does it feel predictable to a passenger in the back seat?

Stop when it feels natural. Most builders settle between -10 and -30.

=== Step 3 — Verify brake lights ===

Plug in a brake light tester or have someone observe while you trigger regen. Brake lights must illuminate whenever regen is actively decelerating the vehicle.

=== Step 4 — Check BMS limits ===

The BMS charge current limit caps how much regen current can flow back into the battery. If <code>idc</code> during regen hits the BMS charge limit and flattens, the inverter is limiting regen to protect the battery — this is correct behaviour. You cannot tune past this limit without raising the BMS charge current setting.

----

== Common Regen Problems ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Symptom || ! Likely cause || ! Fix
|-
| No regen at all || | Firmware < V2.15A || | Update firmware
|-
| No regen at all || | throtmin = 0 || | Set to negative value and save to flash
|-
| Jerky/harsh regen onset || | throtmin too negative || | Reduce magnitude (closer to 0)
|-
| Regen cuts out unexpectedly || | BMS charge limit hit || | Raise BMS max charge current if battery allows
|-
| Brake lights not on during regen || | BrakeLight output not assigned || | Assign BrakeLight function to a Dout pin
|-
| Regen feels inconsistent || | Dual-pot mismatch triggering plausibility fault || | Recalibrate both throttle channels
|-
| GS450h drivetrain jerk on regen || | Auto gear shift timing || | Expected behaviour — V2.15A downshifts before regen
|}

----

== One-Pedal Driving ==

With <code>throtmin</code> set to an appropriate negative value, the vehicle can be driven almost entirely with the throttle pedal — lift for regen deceleration, press for acceleration. Friction brakes are used only for final stops.

This style of driving:
* Increases range by recovering kinetic energy
* Reduces brake wear significantly
* Requires a learning period — new drivers should be warned about the strong deceleration on throttle lift
* Is most effective on routes with repeated stop-start patterns (urban driving)

----

''Source: Damien Maguire @Evbmw — "ZombieVerter VCU Firmware 2.15" (April 2024) · "ZombieVerter VCU Software V2.04" (January 2024)''  
''Regen first working: V2.15A (April 2024) · revRegen added: V2.20A (December 2024)''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''
