= W02 — Throttle & Brake Wiring =

'''Track:''' Wiring  
'''Prerequisites:''' H01 — VCU Hardware Walkthrough  
'''Audience:''' All levels  
'''Estimated reading time:''' 12 minutes

----

== Overview ==

The throttle and brake inputs are the primary driver interface signals. Getting them right — especially the throttle calibration — is essential for safe, predictable vehicle behaviour. This module covers the wiring; calibration parameters are covered in Module C04.

----

== Throttle Pedal Wiring ==

=== Dual vs Single Channel ===

The ZombieVerter supports both single and dual-channel throttle pedals. '''Dual-channel is strongly recommended''' for safety — if one channel fails (open circuit, short circuit, or mechanical linkage failure), the VCU can detect the discrepancy between channels and cut torque rather than applying full throttle.

Single-channel is available but provides no redundancy. If the single pot fails in the high direction, the result is unintended full throttle. Use dual-channel wherever possible.

=== Pin Assignments ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin || ! Function || ! Connect to
|-
| Pin 48 || | Throttle 5V supply || | Throttle pot(s) positive (Vcc)
|-
| Pin 47 || | Throttle channel 1 || | Channel 1 wiper
|-
| Pin 46 || | Throttle channel 2 || | Channel 2 wiper
|-
| Pin 45 || | Throttle ground || | Throttle pot(s) negative (GND)
|}

For a dual-channel pedal, both pots share the 5V supply (Pin 48) and ground (Pin 45), with their wipers going to Pins 47 and 46 respectively.

For a single-channel pedal, only Pins 48, 47, and 45 are used. Set <code>potmode</code> to single in the web interface.

=== Wiring Diagram ===

'''Dual-channel throttle:'''
<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
Pin 48 (5V) ─────┬──────────── Pot 1 Vcc
                 └──────────── Pot 2 Vcc

Pin 47 (Ch1) ─────────────── Pot 1 Wiper
Pin 46 (Ch2) ─────────────── Pot 2 Wiper

Pin 45 (GND) ─────┬──────────── Pot 1 GND
                  └──────────── Pot 2 GND
</syntaxhighlight>

'''Single-channel throttle:'''
<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
Pin 48 (5V) ──────────────── Pot Vcc
Pin 47 (Ch1) ─────────────── Pot Wiper
Pin 45 (GND) ─────────────── Pot GND
</syntaxhighlight>

----

== Understanding How the ZombieVerter Reads Throttle ==

This is one of the most important things to understand before calibrating — '''the ZombieVerter handles potmin/potmax differently from most inverters and motor controllers.'''

=== The Standard Approach (Most Controllers) ===
Most motor controllers set <code>potmin</code> and <code>potmax</code> ''outside'' the mechanical travel range of the pedal. For example, if the pedal physically travels from an ADC value of 400 to 2600, you might set <code>potmin</code> to 300 and <code>potmax</code> to 2700. This way, if a value outside those limits is detected (due to an open wire, short, or mechanical failure), the controller faults safely.

=== The ZombieVerter Approach (Opposite!) ===
The ZombieVerter sets <code>potmin</code> and <code>potmax</code> ''inside'' the mechanical travel range:
* <code>potmin</code> should be set '''just above''' the value seen at the resting (off-throttle) position
* <code>potmax</code> should be set '''just below''' the value seen at full throttle

This means the pedal physically travels slightly beyond both limits. The VCU uses these values to calculate a normalised 0–100 <code>potnom</code> value.

: '''This trips up almost everyone coming from other systems.''' If you set <code>potmin</code> below your actual resting position, the VCU will interpret the pedal as always slightly depressed. If you set <code>potmax</code> above your actual WOT value, you'll never reach 100% torque.

'''Calibration procedure (covered in detail in Module C04):'''
# Watch the <code>pot</code> spot value in the web interface while moving the pedal
# Note the value at rest — set <code>potmin</code> just above this
# Note the value at full travel — set <code>potmax</code> just below this
# Do the same for <code>pot2min</code> / <code>pot2max</code> if using dual-channel

----

== Throttle Parameters Quick Reference ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Parameter || ! Description
|-
| `potmin` || | ADC value just above off-throttle resting position
|-
| `potmax` || | ADC value just below wide-open throttle
|-
| `pot2min` || | Same as potmin but for channel 2
|-
| `pot2max` || | Same as potmax but for channel 2
|-
| `potmode` || | `single` or `dual` — must match your wiring
|-
| `potnom` || | Resulting normalised 0–100 throttle value (spot value, read-only)
|-
| `throtmin` || | Minimum allowed potnom — can be negative (for throttle-lift regen)
|-
| `throtmax` || | Maximum allowed potnom in forward direction
|-
| `throtramp` || | Rate of potnom increase (potnom change per %/10ms) — limits rate of torque rise
|-
| `throtramprpm` || | Motor RPM above which throtramp no longer applies
|-
| `revlim` || | Rev limiter (motor RPM)
|}

=== Critical Gotcha: <code>throtmax</code> Defaults to Zero ===

<code>throtmax</code> defaults to '''0''' in a fresh configuration. This means the VCU will allow zero forward torque regardless of throttle position. '''This is the most common reason for a "throttle does nothing" problem on first start.''' Set <code>throtmax</code> to 100 (or your desired maximum) before expecting torque output.

----

== Brake Signal Wiring ==

=== Purpose ===

The brake signal serves two functions in the ZombieVerter:
# '''Safety interlock''' — <code>din_break</code> must read "off" before the VCU will allow torque output. If the brake is stuck "on", the VCU will not produce torque even if throttle is applied.
# '''Regen trigger''' — applying the brake can trigger regenerative braking (configured separately — see Module A01).

=== Wiring ===

The brake input is a simple digital input:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin || ! Function || ! Connect to
|-
| Pin 49 || | Brake input || | 12V+ when brake pedal is pressed
|}

When the brake pedal is pressed, Pin 49 is pulled to 12V+. When released, Pin 49 should return to 0V (or float).

'''Do not leave Pin 49 floating''' — a floating input can read randomly as "on" due to electrical noise, blocking torque output unpredictably. If you are not wiring a brake signal for now (bench testing), either connect Pin 49 to ground through a resistor or confirm <code>din_break</code> reads "off" in spot values before troubleshooting torque issues.

=== BrakeLight Output ===

The VCU can drive a brake light output from a configurable low-side output pin. Assign the <code>BrakeLight</code> function in the web interface to activate this output when the brake is pressed above a configurable threshold.

----

== Forward / Reverse Wiring ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin || ! Function || ! Connect to
|-
| Pin 54 || | Forward || | 12V+ when forward selected
|-
| Pin 53 || | Reverse || | 12V+ when reverse selected
|}

Both are digital inputs pulled high to 12V+ to select direction. The direction signal can come from:
* A physical gear selector lever with detents (park/reverse/neutral/drive)
* A toggle switch
* A momentary button (set <code>dirmode</code> to <code>button</code> or <code>buttonReversed</code> in the web interface)

<code>dirmode</code> parameter options:
* <code>switch</code> — pin high = direction active
* <code>button</code> — momentary press toggles direction
* <code>switchReversed</code> — inverted logic
* <code>buttonReversed</code> — inverted momentary logic

----

== Common Wiring Mistakes ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Problem || ! Cause
|-
| `din_break` always shows "on" || | Brake pin wired to constant 12V+, or brake switch wired NC instead of NO
|-
| `din_break` always shows "on" || | Floating pin picking up noise — add pull-down resistor
|-
| `potnom` never reaches 100 || | `potmax` set higher than actual WOT ADC value
|-
| `potnom` shows value at rest || | `potmin` set lower than actual resting ADC value
|-
| No torque output || | `throtmax` set to zero (default)
|-
| Erratic torque || | Poor ground connection between throttle pot GND and Pin 45
|-
| Channel 2 fault || | `potmode` set to dual but pot2min/pot2max not calibrated
|}

----

== What's Next ==

* '''C04''' — Throttle Calibration: step-by-step parameter tuning in the web interface
* '''W03''' — Contactor & Precharge Circuit
* '''A01''' — Regen Tuning: brake and throttle-lift regen configuration

----

''Source: openinverter.org/wiki/ZombieVerter_VCU | openinverter.org forum threads''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''
