= W08 — ISA IVT-S Shunt: Complete Reference =

'''Track:''' Wiring · '''Module:''' W08<br>
🟢 Current — verified against ZombieVerter firmware V2.40A source<br>
''Source files reviewed: isa_shunt.cpp, isa_shunt.h, stm32_vcu.cpp, param_prj.h, hwinit.cpp''

== Overview ==

The ISA IVT-S is a combined current/voltage/temperature sensor that communicates over CAN. It is the primary source of pack voltage (<code>udc</code>) and current (<code>idc</code>) for the ZombieVerter VCU. Without it — or an equivalent shunt type — the VCU cannot perform precharge sequencing, SOC calculation, or current limiting.

This module documents the shunt's CAN protocol, initialisation procedure, firmware integration, and spot value mapping, derived directly from the ZombieVerter firmware source code.

== CAN Bus — Critical Fact ==

{{Warning|'''The ZombieVerter-specific IVT-S flash runs at 500 kbps.'''}}

Both CAN1 and CAN2 on the ZombieVerter are hardcoded at 500 kbps in firmware:

 Stm32Can c (CAN1, CanHardware::Baud500);
 Stm32Can c2(CAN2, CanHardware::Baud500, true);

The IVT-S with ZV firmware can share CAN1 or CAN2 with other 500 kbps devices — inverters, BMS modules, ESP32 interfaces, etc. '''No dedicated bus is required.''' Use whichever bus your wiring makes convenient; set <code>ShuntCan</code> to match.

{{Warning|'''Stock (unflashed) IVT-S units default to 1 Mbps''' and will not communicate with the ZombieVerter. The unit must be flashed with the ZombieVerter-specific firmware before use. This flash is available from the openinverter.org community.}}

== ShuntType Parameter ==

{| class="wikitable"
! <code>ShuntType</code> value !! Meaning
|-
| <code>0</code> — None || No shunt. SOC calculations disabled.
|-
| <code>1</code> — ISA || IVT-S shunt. Standard mode.
|-
| <code>2</code> — SBOX || BMW S-Box pack monitor
|-
| <code>3</code> — VAG || VW/Audi e-Box
|-
| <code>4</code> — ISA_udcsw || IVT-S shunt, alternative precharge logic variant
|}

For the IVT-S, set <code>ShuntType = ISA</code> (value 1).

== CAN Message IDs ==

The IVT-S broadcasts 8 messages continuously once running:

{| class="wikitable"
! CAN ID !! Measurement !! Units (raw) !! Spot value
|-
| <code>0x521</code> || Current (Amperes) || mA × 1 (int32) || <code>idc</code>
|-
| <code>0x522</code> || Voltage U1 || mV × 1 (int32) || <code>udc</code>
|-
| <code>0x523</code> || Voltage U2 || mV × 1 (int32) || <code>udc2</code>
|-
| <code>0x524</code> || Voltage U3 || mV × 1 (int32) || <code>udc3</code>
|-
| <code>0x525</code> || Temperature || °C × 10 (int32) || <code>tmpaux</code>
|-
| <code>0x526</code> || Power || W (int32) || <code>power</code>
|-
| <code>0x527</code> || Amp-hours || Ah (int32) || <code>AMPh</code>
|-
| <code>0x528</code> || Kilowatt-hours || kWh (int32) || <code>KWh</code>
|}

All values are big-endian int32, bytes 2–5 of the 8-byte frame. The VCU sends commands to the shunt on '''<code>0x411</code>'''.

== U1, U2, U3 Voltage Inputs ==

* '''U1''' — Primary voltage sense. Used for <code>udc</code>. '''Must connect to the inverter/load side of the main contactor.'''
* '''U2''' — Secondary voltage sense. Optional. Reported as <code>udc2</code>.
* '''U3''' — Third voltage sense. Optional. Reported as <code>udc3</code>. <code>deltaV</code> (U1 − U2) is also computed.

{{Warning|'''U1 placement is safety-critical.''' U1 must sense voltage on the load side of the main contactor. If connected to the battery side, the VCU sees full pack voltage before precharge begins and fires the main contactor into uncharged capacitors.}}

{{Note|'''<code>deltaV</code> is a useful diagnostic.''' During healthy precharge, <code>deltaV</code> (U1 − U2, with U2 on battery side) starts at pack voltage and drops toward zero as caps charge. A stalled precharge shows as a stable non-zero <code>deltaV</code>.}}

== 12V Power Supply ==

The IVT-S requires a '''permanent 12V supply''' — the same feed as the VCU itself.

* VCU and shunt must power up together on the same permanent 12V rail
* Required for the initialisation sequence to complete correctly
* '''Never connect to an ignition-switched feed''' — the shunt must stay powered to maintain coulomb counting when ignition is off

== Initialisation — How It Works in Firmware ==

From <code>stm32_vcu.cpp</code> <code>main()</code>:

 if (Param::GetInt(Param::IsaInit) == 1)
     ISA::initialize(shunt_can);

<code>IsaInit</code> is checked '''once at boot''' — not polled. Setting <code>IsaInit = 1</code> and saving to flash triggers <code>ISA::initialize()</code> on the next power cycle.

<code>ISA::initialize()</code> performs:
# Sends STOP to the shunt
# Sends 9 channel configuration messages
# Sends STORE after each — writes to shunt flash
# Sends START — resumes measurement

=== Step-by-step procedure ===

# Wire IVT-S: CAN H/L to VCU CAN1 or CAN2, permanent 12V+, GND
# Set <code>ShuntType = ISA</code>, <code>ShuntCan</code> to match wiring — save to flash
# Set <code>IsaInit = 1</code> — save to flash
# Power cycle VCU and shunt simultaneously (shared 12V feed does this automatically)
# Verify <code>udc</code> shows a reading in Spot Values
# '''Set <code>IsaInit = 0</code> — save to flash'''
# Reboot the VCU

{{Warning|<code>IsaInit</code> is not automatically cleared by the firmware. Leaving it at 1 re-runs the full init — including coulomb counter reset — on every boot. Always set it back to 0 after a successful init.}}

== Additional Commands ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Function !! Command ID !! byte[0] !! Effect
|-
| STOP || <code>0x411</code> || <code>0x34</code> || Halts measurement
|-
| START || <code>0x411</code> || <code>0x34</code> + byte[1]=<code>0x01</code> || Resumes measurement
|-
| STORE || <code>0x411</code> || <code>0x32</code> || Saves config to shunt flash
|-
| RESTART || <code>0x411</code> || <code>0x3F</code> || '''Zeros Ah and kWh counters''' — does not re-init
|-
| deFAULT || <code>0x411</code> || <code>0x3D</code> || Returns shunt to factory defaults — '''wipes ZV flash'''
|}

{{Warning|Do not send <code>deFAULT</code> to a ZV-flashed shunt. It erases the ZV firmware configuration and reverts the shunt to 1 Mbps.}}

{{Note|<code>RESTART</code> is useful for bench sessions — zeros the coulomb counter without requiring a full re-init.}}

== Spot Values — Complete Mapping ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Spot Value !! Source !! Description
|-
| <code>udc</code> || ISA Voltage (0x522 / U1) || Pack voltage — primary input for precharge logic
|-
| <code>udc2</code> || ISA Voltage2 (0x523 / U2) || Secondary voltage sense
|-
| <code>udc3</code> || ISA Voltage3 (0x524 / U3) || Tertiary voltage sense
|-
| <code>deltaV</code> || U1 − U2 || Voltage difference — useful precharge diagnostic
|-
| <code>idc</code> || ISA Amperes (0x521) || Pack current (positive = discharge, negative = regen/charge)
|-
| <code>power</code> || ISA KW (0x526) || Instantaneous power in kW
|-
| <code>AMPh</code> || ISA Ah (0x527) || Cumulative amp-hours since last RESTART or init
|-
| <code>KWh</code> || ISA KWh (0x528) || Cumulative kWh since last RESTART or init
|-
| <code>tmpaux</code> || ISA Temperature (0x525) || Shunt temperature
|-
| <code>SOC</code> || Calculated from Ah + <code>BattCap</code> || State of charge %
|}

<code>SOC</code> calculation runs every 100ms only when <code>ShuntType != 0</code>.

== Precharge Integration ==

Precharge exits to RUN or CHARGE only when:
* <code>udc >= udcsw</code>, AND
* Minimum 1-second precharge time elapsed, AND
* No throttle pressed, no voltage faults

If <code>udc < udcsw</code> after '''5 seconds''' (hardcoded <code>PRECHARGE_TIMEOUT</code> — not configurable), the VCU posts <code>ERR_PRECHARGE</code> and enters <code>MOD_PCHFAIL</code>.

== Troubleshooting ==

'''<code>udc</code> reads zero after init:'''
* Verify <code>ShuntType = ISA</code> and <code>ShuntCan</code> correct — save to flash and reboot
* Check CAN H/L connections and 120Ω termination
* Confirm shunt has ZV firmware — stock units at 1 Mbps will not respond
* Re-run the init procedure

'''Init timing issue:'''
* Power shunt 2–3 seconds before VCU — fixes race condition on some units

'''<code>udc</code> reads full pack voltage during precharge:'''
* U1 is on the battery side — move to the inverter/load side of the main contactor

'''<code>IsaInit</code> keeps re-running on every boot:'''
* Set <code>IsaInit = 0</code>, save to flash

== Related Modules ==

* '''W03''' — Contactor and precharge circuit
* '''W07''' — CAN bus wiring
* '''C03''' — Essential parameters: first start
* '''A03''' — BMS integration

----

''Source: ZombieVerter firmware — isa_shunt.cpp (Jack Rickard / EVtv, adapted by Damien Maguire), stm32_vcu.cpp (Tom de Bree, Johannes Hübner, Damien Maguire), param_prj.h''<br>
''Last verified against firmware: V2.40A''
