{{ZombieVerter Training Module
|code=W06
|title=12V Auxiliary & Ignition Wiring
|source=https://github.com/robertwa1974/zombieverter-training
|firmware=V2.30A
}}

----

== Overview ==

The ZombieVerter's 12V wiring is divided into three logical groups:
# '''Permanent power''' — always on, powers the VCU itself
# '''Ignition ON''' — switched when the key is turned to "on" position
# '''Start''' — momentary signal when the key is turned to "start" position

Understanding why these are separate — and keeping them separate — is important for correct contactor sequencing and reliable operation.

----

== Permanent Power ==

The VCU must remain powered at all times, even when the vehicle is "off." This is required for:
* Charge timers
* Charging session management
* Monitoring systems during parking
* ISA shunt continuous UDC reporting

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin !! Function
|-
| Pin 56 || 12V+ permanent positive
|-
| Pin 55 || 12V− ground
|}


* Bench power supply (recommended — set to 13V, limit to 1–2A)
* Car battery (add a fuse)
* 9V battery (works for basic power-up verification only — not for any functional testing)

{{Tip|'''Do not use an ignition-switched supply for permanent power.''' The VCU and ISA shunt must stay on when the key is off. See Module W03 for why this matters for precharge.}}

----

== Fuse Block Strategy ==

For a clean installation, use separate fuse blocks for:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Fuse block !! Powers !! Notes
|-
| '''Permanent power block''' || VCU (Pin 56), ISA shunt, any always-on devices || Direct from battery through main fuse
|-
| '''Ignition ON block''' || Devices that should power on with key || Fed from VCU-controlled relay (Pin 32 output)
|-
| '''Start position block''' || Start signal only || Momentary feed
|}

Using separate fuse blocks makes troubleshooting far easier — you can isolate each logical group.

----

== Ignition ON Signal ==

When the driver turns the key to the "on" position (not start), Pin 15 must see 12V.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin !! Function !! Signal type
|-
| Pin 15 || Ignition ON || 12V switched — stays on while key is in ON position
|}

This is not a momentary signal. It stays high for the entire time the vehicle is in use.


----

== Start Signal ==

When the driver turns the key to the "start" position (momentary crank position), Pin 52 must see a brief 12V pulse.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin !! Function !! Signal type
|-
| Pin 52 || Start || Momentary 12V — brief pulse, like turning a key to start
|}

The start signal triggers the precharge sequence. It does not need to stay high — a pulse of at least ~500ms is sufficient. The VCU latches into precharge mode once triggered.



----

== The Inverter/Charger Enable Relay (Pin 32) ==

The VCU controls an external relay through Pin 32 (low-side switching) to provide a managed "ignition" or "enable" signal to the inverter, charger, and DC-DC converter. These devices should not receive their enable signal until the VCU is ready for them.

* Pin 32 is a low-side output — it pulls the relay coil ground to ground when activated
* The relay switches 12V to the enable pins of the inverter, charger, and/or DC-DC
* The VCU controls when this relay fires based on operating state

``<code>
12V+ ─────────── [Relay coil +]
                 [Relay coil −] ──── Pin 32 (VCU) ──── GND

12V+ ─────────── [Relay switch COM]
                 [Relay switch NO] ──── Inverter enable / ignition input
                                   └── Charger enable input
                                   └── DC-DC enable input
</code>`<code>

{{Tip|This relay is sometimes called the "inverter relay" or "ignition relay" in forum discussions. It's the same thing — a VCU-controlled switch that powers up the drivetrain components when the VCU is ready.}}

----

== Forward and Reverse Signals ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin !! Function !! Signal type
|-
| Pin 54 || Forward || 12V when forward direction selected
|-
| Pin 53 || Reverse || 12V when reverse direction selected
|}

=== Direction Mode Options ===

Configure via </code>dirmode<code> parameter (under Throttle in the web interface):

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! dirmode setting !! How it works
|-
| </code>defaultFwd<code> || No wiring needed for forward. Default direction is forward when in run mode. Add a button on Pin 53 to select reverse.
|-
| </code>button<code> || Use a momentary button. No pin active = default direction. Pin active = alternate direction.
|-
| </code>switch<code> || Use a 3-position switch. Pin 54 high = forward, Pin 53 high = reverse, neither high = neutral.
|-
| </code>switchReversed<code> || Same as switch but motor direction inverted. Use if drivetrain spins backwards.
|-
| </code>buttonReversed<code> || Same as button but inverted.
|}

=== Behaviour in Each Mode ===


* Position 1 → 12V to Pin 54 → Forward/Drive
* Position 2 → Centre (neither pin active) → Neutral
* Position 3 → 12V to Pin 53 → Reverse

The direction shown in spot values will track the switch position. Note: the switch wiring can be counterintuitive — the "Forward" label on the switch often corresponds to the opposite blade terminal. Check your specific switch's wiring diagram.

Direction goes to Neutral when opmode goes to Off. When you next start the vehicle with the switch in Forward, it will immediately go to Drive — correct behaviour.

=== Torque Direction ===

Forward sends positive torque commands to the inverter. Reverse sends negative torque commands — the motor spins in the opposite direction. There is no physical reverse gear in most EV transaxles (Prius, Outlander, Leaf) — reverse is achieved by commanding negative torque.



----

== Brake Signal ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin !! Function !! Signal type
|-
| Pin 49 || Brake || 12V when brake pedal pressed
|}

The brake signal is a safety interlock. </code>din_break<code> must read "off" (brake not pressed) for the VCU to allow torque output.

Wire to the normally-open (NO) terminal of the brake light switch, so Pin 49 sees 12V only when the brake pedal is depressed.


----

== The "Holy Trinity" — Minimum for Run Mode ==

From bench testing experience, the minimum wires required to reach run mode are:

# '''Pin 56''' — permanent 12V+
# '''Pin 55''' — permanent ground
# '''Pin 15''' — ignition ON (12V switched)
# '''Pin 52''' — start (momentary 12V)
# '''Pin 54 or 53''' — forward or reverse direction

Plus correct parameters (especially </code>udcsw<code>, </code>shuntType<code>, and </code>throtmax`).

----

== What's Next ==

* '''W07''' — CAN Bus Wiring
* '''W03''' — Contactor & Precharge Circuit
* '''C03''' — Essential Parameters: First Start

----

''Source: "EV Conversion DIY Wire Harness" series, "ZombieVerter VCU Forward & Reverse" — Good Enuff Garage (Apr–May 2024)''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''