{{ZombieVerter Training Module
|code=A05
|title=CAN Gateway & Multi-Node Systems
|source=https://github.com/robertwa1974/zombieverter-training
|firmware=V2.30A
}}

----

== Overview ==

The ZombieVerter has three independent CAN buses. Understanding how to assign devices, terminate correctly, and integrate OEM instrument clusters is what separates a functional conversion from a polished one.

----

== CAN Bus Physical Wiring ==

=== Termination — The Most Skipped Step ===

A CAN bus must have exactly '''two 120Ω termination resistors''' — one at each physical end of the bus. Without correct termination you get signal reflections, corrupted frames, and intermittent communication failures that are very hard to diagnose.

{{Warning|'''🔴 Exactly two 120Ω resistors — one at each end of each bus.'''}}

One resistor at the VCU end (often built into the VCU board). One at the furthest device on that bus. Between CAN H and CAN L.


{{Note|'''⚠ Check device datasheets.''' Some inverters and OBCs have built-in 120Ω termination. Adding an external resistor to a device that already has one results in too many terminators and bus instability.}}

=== Topology — Bus Not Star ===

CAN is a bus topology. All devices connect to the same two wires (CAN H and CAN L) running from one end to the other. Avoid star topologies and long stub branches.

``<code>
Correct — bus topology:
[120Ω] ─── VCU ─── ISA Shunt ─── Inverter ─── [120Ω]

Wrong — star topology:
              VCU
              ├── ISA Shunt    ← signal reflections at each stub
              ├── Inverter
              └── BMS
</code>`<code>

Use twisted pair for all CAN runs. Shielded twisted pair for runs near HV cables or in noisy environments.

=== Baud Rates by Device ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Device !! Baud rate
|-
| Nissan Leaf inverter || 500 kbps
|-
| Mitsubishi Outlander || 500 kbps
|-
| ISA IVT shunt || 1000 kbps (1 Mbps)
|-
| SimpBMS / Orion BMS || 500 kbps
|-
| BMW i3 LIM || 500 kbps
|-
| CHAdeMO socket || 500 kbps (fault-tolerant CAN3)
|-
| OBD2 / ELM327 || 500 kbps
|}

All devices on the same CAN bus must run at the same baud rate. The ISA shunt at 1 Mbps typically needs its own bus separate from 500 kbps devices.

----

== Assigning Devices to CAN Buses ==

=== The Three Buses ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Bus !! Notes
|-
| CAN1 || High-speed CAN. Primary bus for most inverters.
|-
| CAN2 || High-speed CAN. Secondary bus — BMS, shunt, second devices.
|-
| CAN3 || Configurable via PCB jumpers — high-speed, fault-tolerant, or single-wire. Used for CHAdeMO.
|}

=== Assignment Parameters ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Parameter !! What it assigns
|-
| </code>inverterCan<code> || Which bus the traction inverter is on
|-
| </code>shuntCan<code> || Which bus the ISA shunt is on
|-
| </code>bmsCan<code> || Which bus the cell BMS is on
|-
| </code>chargerCan<code> || Which bus the OBC is on
|}

=== Typical Configuration ===

</code>`<code>
CAN1 @ 500 kbps:
  Traction inverter   (inverterCan = CAN1)
  Leaf PDM            (same bus as inverter)
  BMW i3 LIM          (CCS — same bus)

CAN2 @ 1000 kbps:
  ISA shunt           (shuntCan = CAN2)
  SimpBMS / Orion     (bmsCan = CAN2, if 500k: separate bus from shunt)

CAN3 @ 500 kbps fault-tolerant:
  CHAdeMO socket      (6 PCB jumpers required)
</code>`<code>

{{Note|'''⚠ CAN1/CAN2 label swap:''' There is a known documentation issue where CAN1 and CAN2 are labelled in reverse in some older wiring diagrams. If a device won't communicate despite correct wiring, try swapping the bus assignment parameter value before rewiring.}}

----

== Vehicle CAN Integration ==

=== The vehicle Parameter ===

Set </code>vehicle<code> to tell the VCU which OEM CAN profile to use. The VCU then sends spoofed CAN messages to keep the instrument cluster functional.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! vehicle setting !! Covers !! What it drives
|-
| BMW E46 || 1998–2005 3-series || Speedo, tacho, temp, fuel level, CEL suppression
|-
| BMW E6x+ || E60/E90/E9x/E91 || Speedo, tacho, lock state, warning lights
|-
| BMW E39 || 1996–2003 5-series || Speedo, tacho, instrument functions
|-
| BMW E31 || 8-series || Added V2.04A
|-
| VAG || Mid-2000s VW/Audi || Instrument cluster CAN
|-
| Subaru || Various || CAN integration
|-
| Classic || Any vehicle || No vehicle CAN — uses analog outputs only
|-
| None || — || No vehicle CAN output
|}

=== BMW E9x — Added V2.20A ===

The E90/E91/E92/E93 CAN integration added in V2.20A includes:
* Lock state over CAN
* Warning lights control (suppresses CEL and ICE-specific warnings)
* Vehicle speed driven from motor RPM

=== If Your Vehicle Isn't Listed ===

Use Classic mode and drive gauges with analog PWM outputs. You can also submit a CAN log from your OEM vehicle as a GitHub feature request — see Module A06.

----

== Classic Mode & Analog Gauges ==

Set </code>vehicle<code> = Classic for any vehicle without CAN-based instruments — pre-2000 vehicles, classic cars, trucks, kit cars.

=== Tachometer — TachoPPR Parameter (V2.20A+) ===

The VCU outputs a pulse signal from a PWM output pin that can drive an OEM analog tachometer. </code>TachoPPR<code> sets pulses per revolution:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! TachoPPR !! Equivalent cylinder count
|-
| 1 || 1-cylinder
|-
| 2 || 4-cylinder (typical default)
|-
| 3 || 6-cylinder
|-
| 4 || 8-cylinder
|}

Tune until the needle reads actual motor RPM. Assign the tacho output function in the Dout section.

=== Speedometer ===

A speedo pulse output is also available via the GS450h pump pin in V2.20A+ when set to Classic mode. Configure PPR to match your OEM speedo sender expectation.

=== Fuel Gauge — Digipot Method ===

For vehicles without CAN fuel gauge control, a digital potentiometer (digipot) IC wired between the VCU and the OEM fuel gauge sender wire can drive the fuel needle to show state of charge.

The VCU controls the digipot resistance in steps. Calibrate by setting step values and observing needle position:
* 0 steps = low fuel warning triggered
* Tune mid-scale and full-scale steps to match actual SoC at those points

The temperature gauge can also be driven from </code>temphs<code> (inverter heatsink temperature) or </code>tempm<code> (motor temperature) in some vehicle classes.

----

== OBD2 & Live Telemetry ==

=== OBD2 via CAN (V2.04A+) ===

The VCU can respond to OBD2 requests over CAN, allowing standard Bluetooth OBD dongles and apps like Torque Pro to read live VCU data — motor speed, pack voltage, current, SoC, temperatures.

{{Note|'''⚠ Dongle quality matters.''' Cheap AliExpress ELM327 clones have inconsistent results. Higher-quality Bluetooth or WiFi OBD adapters work reliably. If Torque Pro connects but shows no data, try a different dongle before assuming a configuration problem.}}

=== Web Interface Graphing ===

The VCU web interface includes built-in real-time graphing. Select spot values to plot, set the update interval. Useful for:
* Throttle linearity during calibration (plot </code>potnom<code> vs </code>pot<code>)
* Precharge voltage rise (plot </code>udc<code> over time)
* Temperature monitoring under load (</code>temphs<code>, </code>tempm<code>)
* Regen tuning (</code>idc<code> going negative during deceleration)

=== Parameter Files on GitHub ===

Damien publishes parameter files for his fleet vehicles (E39, E46, E31, L200 truck) on the ZombieVerter GitHub repo. These are real working configurations for tested vehicles — a useful starting point for matching drivetrain/vehicle combinations before tuning your own build.

----

== Diagnosing CAN Communication Failures ==

Work through in order:

# Is the correct bus assignment parameter set?
# Is the baud rate consistent across all devices on that bus?
# Is termination correct? Measure ~60Ω across H/L with power off.
# Try swapping </code>inverterCan<code> or </code>shuntCan` value (CAN1/CAN2 label swap issue).
# Are CAN H and CAN L wires the right way around? Try swapping them.
# Is the cable twisted pair? Long untwisted runs in noisy environments cause intermittent failures.

----

''Source: Damien Maguire @Evbmw · openinverter.org/wiki · V2.04A changelog · V2.20A changelog''  
''TachoPPR added V2.20A · E90 CAN added V2.20A · OBD2 added V2.04A · E31 added V2.04A''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''