{{ZombieVerter Training Module
|code=W05
|title=Cooling System Control
|source=https://github.com/robertwa1974/zombieverter-training
|firmware=V2.30A
}}

----

== Why Cooling Matters More in a Conversion ==

In an OEM EV, the cooling system is engineered alongside the drivetrain with precise flow rates, thermal mass, and thermostat control tuned for that specific motor and inverter. In a conversion, you are building a cooling system from scratch around salvaged components that were designed with different assumptions.

Under-cooling in a conversion manifests as:
* Thermal derating — the inverter reduces available torque as temperature rises
* Thermal shutdown — the inverter or motor stops completely to protect itself
* Accelerated component degradation over time

Over-cooling wastes energy running pumps and fans at full speed continuously. The VCU can manage both.

----

== What the VCU Can Control ==

The VCU has dedicated output functions for cooling components, assignable via the Dout section of the web interface:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Function !! What it controls !! How it activates
|-
| <code>CoolantPump</code> || Electric coolant pump relay || On during pre-charge, charge and run mode
|-
| <code>GS450Hpump</code> || GS450h oil pump PWM || PWM speed control via PumpPWM parameter
|-
| <code>CoolingFan</code> || Cooling fan relay or speed controller || Activates when temp exceeds FanTemp
|-
| <code>BrakeVacPump</code> || Brake vacuum pump relay || Activates when brake vacuum is low
|}

----

== Coolant Pump ==

An electric coolant pump must run whenever the inverter is active — from precharge through to run mode shutdown. Assign <code>CoolantPump</code> to a low-side digital output pin.




----

== Cooling Fan — FanTemp (V2.20A+) ==

<code>FanTemp</code> sets the inverter heatsink temperature (<code>temphs</code>) at which the VCU activates the cooling fan output.

``<code>
FanTemp = 40    ← fan on when heatsink reaches 40°C
</code>`<code>

Set this based on your cooling system design. A well-designed cooling loop should keep the inverter heatsink below 60°C under sustained load. If </code>temphs<code> regularly reaches 80°C+, the cooling system needs more capacity.


----

== Brake Vacuum Pump ==

Many non-hybrid donor vehicles use engine vacuum for brake servo assistance. In an EV conversion with no engine, this vacuum disappears. An electric vacuum pump is required for brake servo operation.

The VCU can monitor a vacuum sensor and activate a vacuum pump as needed:
# Assign </code>BrakeVacSensor<code> to an analogue input pin
# Assign </code>BrakeVacPump<code> to a digital output pin
# The VCU activates the pump when vacuum drops below threshold

Alternatively, use a standalone electric vacuum pump controller — these are available as off-the-shelf units that self-regulate without VCU integration.

----

== Temperature Monitoring ==

The VCU receives temperature data from several sources:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Spot value !! Source
|-
| </code>temphs<code> || Inverter heatsink temperature (from inverter CAN)
|-
| </code>tempm<code> || Motor temperature (from inverter CAN, where supported)
|-
| </code>tempcool<code> || Coolant temperature (if thermistor connected to VCU analogue input)
|}

For vehicle integration, </code>temphs<code> and </code>tempm<code> can be used to drive the OEM temperature gauge (where the vehicle class supports it) — giving the driver a real indication of drivetrain thermal state.

----

== Thermal Derating ==

Most supported inverters implement their own thermal derating — as heatsink temperature rises above a threshold, the inverter reduces available torque. This is done inside the inverter firmware, not by the VCU. The VCU sees reduced torque output but cannot override inverter-internal derating.

Signs of thermal derating:
* Throttle at 100% but </code>torque<code> spot value below maximum
* </code>temphs` above 60–70°C
* Performance gradually reduces after sustained high-load driving

Solution: more cooling. Larger radiator, higher flow pump, or additional cooling surface.

----

== Common Cooling Mistakes ==




----

''Source: Damien Maguire @Evbmw — V2.20A firmware walkthrough (December 2024) · openinverter.org community builds''  
''PumpPWM and FanTemp added V2.20A''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''