{{ZombieVerter Training Module
|code=W01
|title=Wiring Philosophy & Best Practices
|source=https://github.com/robertwa1974/zombieverter-training
|firmware=V2.30A
}}

----

== The Philosophy ==

A ZombieVerter wiring harness is not a single entity — it is three logically separate fuse blocks, each with a distinct purpose, feeding different groups of components. Understanding this structure before crimping a single terminal will save hours of debugging later.

The three groups are:

# '''Permanent power''' — always live, even when the vehicle is parked
# '''Ignition ON''' — live when the key is in the ON position
# '''Start position''' — momentary signal only, like turning a key to START

Each group has its own fuse block. Each fuse block has its own feed from the 12V battery. Mixing these groups — feeding an ignition-switched device from permanent power, or running too much current through the ignition switch — is the most common source of mysterious electrical gremlins in EV conversions.

----

== Fuse Block Strategy ==

=== Permanent Power Block ===





=== Ignition ON Block ===



=== Start Position Block ===



----

== Wire Gauging ==

Wire gauge is specified in AWG in North America, metric cross-section (mm²) in Europe. Higher AWG number = thinner wire — the opposite of the metric system.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Application !! Suggested gauge
|-
| HV main traction cables || 35–70mm² (0 AWG or larger)
|-
| HV charger / DC-DC || 10–16mm² (6–4 AWG)
|-
| 12V main battery feed || 6–10mm² (10–8 AWG)
|-
| 12V fuse block feeds || 4mm² (12 AWG)
|-
| Signal wires (VCU pins) || 0.5–1mm² (20–18 AWG)
|-
| CAN bus || 0.5mm² twisted pair (22 AWG)
|}

{{Tip|'''Rule:''' Rule: Size the wire for the load current. Then size the fuse just below the wire's current rating. The fuse protects the wire — the wire must already be sized to handle the device.}}

----

== Connector Selection ==





----

== Labelling ==

Label every wire at both ends before installation. Once a harness is routed and cable-tied, tracing an unlabelled wire is extremely time-consuming.

A simple label convention:
``<code>
P56-12VPERM   ← Pin 56, permanent 12V
P15-IGNON     ← Pin 15, ignition ON signal
CAN1H-INV     ← CAN1 High, to inverter
</code>`<code>

Use heat-shrink label sleeves or a label maker with vinyl tape. Marker pen on tape fades in heat and oil.

----

== Dupont Cables — For Bench Only ==

Dupont (breadboard) jumper cables are useful for initial bench testing — they let you power up the board without committing to a permanent header. However they are loose, unreliable, and not rated for automotive vibration. Remove and replace with proper crimped terminals before the vehicle goes on the road.

----

== Building the Harness — The Sequence ==

Good Enuff Garage's wire harness series (April–June 2024) documents the complete ZombieVerter harness build sequence. The recommended order:

# '''Permanent power fuse block''' — build first, verify VCU powers up and Wi-Fi appears
# '''Ignition switch to VCU''' — add ignition ON (Pin 15) and momentary start (Pin 52)
# '''Verify run mode on bench''' — 12V only, no HV — before adding anything else
# '''Forward/reverse switch''' — add direction control (Pins 53/54), verify din_forward/din_reverse in Spot Values
# '''Brake signal''' — add brake switch (Pin 49), verify din_brake goes on/off correctly
# '''Throttle wiring''' — add pot signals, calibrate
# '''Inverter relay''' — add Pin 32 output relay, test switched supply
# '''Contactor wiring''' — add precharge, negative, main contactor coil wiring
# '''CAN bus''' — add inverter CAN, shunt CAN
# '''HV connections''' — final step, after all 12V functionality is verified

Build incrementally and verify each step before adding the next. A fault in step 3 is easy to find. The same fault buried under 8 more steps takes hours.

----

== The Safety Box Harness ==

The BMW Safety Box (S-BOX) is often used in BMW-based conversions to provide pack monitoring and HVIL in one unit. The S-BOX harness is covered in the wire harness series (May 2024, Parts 1 and 2). Key point: the S-BOX communicates over CAN2 and provides the </code>udc<code> reading that the VCU uses for precharge. Set </code>shuntType<code> = SBOX and </code>shuntCan<code> = CAN2.

----

== Common Wiring Mistakes ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Mistake !! Consequence !! Prevention
|-
| VCU on ignition-switched power || Shunt loses UDC, precharge fails every startup || Permanent power to Pin 56 always
|-
| Brake switch on normally-closed terminal || </code>din_brake` stuck on, no torque ever || Use normally-open (NO) terminal
|-
| CAN H and CAN L swapped || No communication, no fault message || Use twisted pair, check colour code
|-
| Missing CAN termination || Intermittent communication faults under load || 120Ω at each end of each bus
|-
| throtmax left at 0 || Throttle does nothing || Set to 100 — see C04
|-
| Contactor coil+ wired to VCU output pin || VCU output damaged — outputs are low-side only || Coil+ to 12V, coil− to VCU pin
|}

----

''Source: Good Enuff Garage "DIY Wire Harness" series (April–June 2024, 10 videos) · Damien Maguire @Evbmw''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''