{{ZombieVerter Training Module
|code=F01
|title=What Is a VCU and Why Do You Need One
|source=https://github.com/robertwa1974/zombieverter-training
|firmware=V2.30A
}}

----

== The Problem With Donor EV Components ==

When you salvage an inverter and motor from a wrecked Nissan Leaf, you have powerful, proven hardware — but that hardware was designed to talk to a Leaf BMS, a Leaf dashboard, a Leaf brake controller, and a Leaf battery management system. None of which you have.

Every donor EV component speaks its own proprietary CAN protocol. The inverter expects specific CAN messages on specific message IDs at specific baud rates. It won't spin without them. Building a custom controller to reverse-engineer and replicate those messages for every possible inverter type would take months per build.

A Vehicle Control Unit solves this problem. It's a purpose-built translator that sits between your donor drivetrain components and your conversion vehicle, speaking the language each component needs.

----

== What a VCU Does ==

In a ZombieVerter-based conversion, the VCU is responsible for:

'''Contactor sequencing''' — closing the negative contactor, running precharge through a resistor, monitoring HV bus voltage, then closing the main contactor in the correct sequence. This protects the inverter capacitors from inrush current damage on every startup.

'''Torque control''' — reading the throttle pedal, mapping it to a 0–100% demand, and sending the appropriate CAN torque command to the inverter. Without this, the inverter has no way to know how much torque the driver is requesting.

'''Direction control''' — handling forward/reverse selection and communicating motor direction to the inverter.

'''Regen control''' — managing regenerative braking via throttle lift and brake pedal, sending negative torque commands to the inverter (V2.15A onwards).

'''Charge control''' — managing the onboard charger and DC-DC converter via CAN when plugged in.

'''BMS integration''' — reading current limits from a cell BMS and enforcing them as caps on motor torque and charge current.

'''Vehicle integration''' — sending spoofed CAN messages to keep the OEM instrument cluster functional (speedometer, tacho, warning lights).

'''Safety''' — opening contactors immediately on fault conditions, HVIL loop monitoring, brake interlock enforcement.

----

== What a VCU Is Not ==

A VCU is not a motor controller or inverter. It does not switch the high-voltage phases to the motor. The inverter does that. The VCU tells the inverter what torque to produce — the inverter does the actual power switching.

A VCU is not a BMS. It does not monitor individual cell voltages or temperatures, balance cells, or protect against cell-level faults. That is the job of a separate BMS (SimpBMS, Orion, etc.). The VCU reads the output of the BMS — current limits — and enforces them.

----

== What Makes ZombieVerter Different ==

Before the ZombieVerter, DIY EV converters had two options: write custom Arduino/microcontroller code to replicate inverter CAN messages (high skill barrier, per-inverter effort), or use the openinverter framework on a custom PCB (powerful but complex to set up).

The ZombieVerter packages the openinverter framework in a purpose-built VCU board with:

* '''No programming required''' — all configuration through a browser-based web interface over Wi-Fi
* '''Multi-inverter support''' — select your inverter type from a dropdown; the VCU handles the rest
* '''Multi-charger support''' — Leaf PDM, VW OBC, Tesla Gen2/3, Outlander OBC, CHAdeMO, CCS
* '''IO Matrix''' — configurable input/output pin functions without code changes
* '''Active community''' — openinverter.org forum with hundreds of documented builds

----

== The Hardware ==

The ZombieVerter board is built around two processors:

'''STM32F107''' — the main MCU. Runs the VCU firmware, manages all I/O, handles CAN communication with all connected devices, runs the contactor sequencing logic, calculates torque demands.

'''ESP8266''' — the Wi-Fi module. Hosts the web configuration interface. Broadcasts a Wi-Fi access point you connect to from any browser. Does not run VCU functions — it's purely the configuration layer.

The board connects to your vehicle through a 56-pin Aptiv automotive connector. All vehicle wiring — power, signals, CAN buses, contactor outputs — goes through this one connector.

{{Tip|Available from evbmw.com as a complete pre-programmed kit, partial kit, or PCB-only.}}

----

== The Community ==

The ZombieVerter is designed and maintained by Damien Maguire (EVBMW) and built on Johannes Huebner's openinverter firmware framework. It is genuinely open source — schematics, firmware, and board files are on GitHub.

The community is at openinverter.org/forum. Hundreds of completed builds are documented there, covering BMW E-series, Volkswagen, Mitsubishi, classic vehicles, and many others.

Damien's YouTube channel (@Evbmw) documents everything he builds and every firmware release with walkthrough videos — an invaluable resource that directly informed this training series.

----

== Next Steps ==

* '''F02''' — ZombieVerter Ecosystem Overview: supported hardware, community resources
* '''H01''' — VCU Hardware Walkthrough: the board in detail
* '''C03''' — Essential Parameters: First Start: get to run mode on your bench

----

''Source: Damien Maguire @Evbmw — "New VCU Project Introduction" (February 2021)''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''