{{ZombieVerter Training Module
|code=A06
|title=Firmware Customisation & Contributing
|source=https://github.com/robertwa1974/zombieverter-training
|firmware=V2.30A
}}

----

== Overview ==

The ZombieVerter firmware is fully open source, hosted at [https://github.com/damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu github.com/damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu]. When you need something the firmware doesn't yet support, you have three paths — and one of them requires no coding at all.

----

== Path 1 — GitHub Feature Request (No Coding Required) ==

The simplest path. File an issue on GitHub describing what you need. The maintainers and community evaluate it, and if it fits the project goals and has sufficient demand, it gets implemented.

=== How to File a Good Request ===

'''Search existing issues first.''' Your feature may already have been requested, discussed, or even implemented in a recent release that you haven't updated to yet. Check both open and closed issues.

'''Describe the use case, not the implementation.''' "I need to control a Renault Zoe OBC" is a better issue than "add parameter X with value Y to CAN message Z." The maintainers understand the codebase far better than most requesters — explain the problem you're trying to solve.

'''Provide CAN logs if relevant.''' For new inverter or charger support, a CAN log captured from the OEM vehicle is the single most valuable thing you can provide. Without it, reverse engineering has to start from zero. This is why the forum is full of "does anyone have a CAN log for X?" threads — they unlock new hardware support.

'''Post on the forum first.''' openinverter.org/forum is the right first stop before GitHub. If others need the same feature, the forum thread becomes evidence of demand. It also filters out requests that are already supported with a simple parameter change.

=== What Gets Prioritised ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Priority !! Type of request
|-
| High || Bug fixes · Safety issues · Widely-used hardware with CAN log data available
|-
| Medium || New inverter/charger support with community demand · Features partially implemented
|-
| Lower || Niche hardware with single user · Features requiring significant reverse engineering from scratch
|}

----

== Path 2 — Fork and Self-Implement ==

Clone the repo, make your changes, compile, flash to your VCU, and run it. You're entirely in control. No obligation to contribute back to the main project — it's your fork.

``<code>bash
git clone --recurse-submodules git@github.com:damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu.git
</code>`<code>

{{Note|'''⚠ </code>--recurse-submodules<code> is mandatory.''' The firmware depends on </code>libopeninv<code> (Johannes Huebner's openinverter framework) and other submodules. Without this flag the build fails with missing includes.}}

=== Build Environment ===

The firmware uses an ARM GCC toolchain. Build documentation is on the openinverter.org wiki. Johannes Huebner's GitHub ([https://github.com/jsphuebner github.com/jsphuebner]) is the reference for the underlying parameter system and CAN class architecture — understanding his framework is essential for meaningful customisation.

=== GD32 Boards ===

{{Note|'''⚠ If you have a GD32F107 board, the GD_Zombie branch was abandoned and has substantially diverged from main.''' Self-building for a GD board means starting from that old branch — you will not have features from V2.00A onwards. See Module C01 for chip identification.}}

----

== Path 3 — Pull Request to Main Branch ==

If you implement something genuinely useful for the wider community, you can submit a pull request. This is how most new hardware support, vehicle classes, and firmware features have landed — contributions from community members working on their own builds who then share the work.

Examples of community contributions that made it into main: BMW E31 vehicle class, OBD2 support, analog IO matrix, JLR gear shifter, Kangoo BMS, MG ZS OBC.

=== The Testing Requirement ===

{{Warning|'''🔴 Changes must be tested in real vehicles before merging. This is non-negotiable.'''}}

The firmware runs high-voltage systems in moving vehicles. A bug that gets through to a release can cause a precharge failure at speed, unintended motor torque, a contactor fault, or worse. Damien personally tests new features across multiple vehicles — typically 3–4 different builds covering different drivetrain and charger combinations — before any release goes out.

This is why release cycles are measured in months, not weeks. V2.20A was tested across four running vehicles (BMW E39, E46, E31, and the Mitsubishi L200 truck) before release. The testing isn't just "does it compile and power up" — it's sustained real-world driving with the full complement of features active.

=== What a Good Pull Request Includes ===

* Working, clean code
* Evidence of testing in at least one real vehicle (ideally more)
* CAN log data if it's a new device integration
* A description of what was tested, what edge cases were considered, and any known limitations
* No breaking changes to existing functionality without discussion first

The community is welcoming to well-tested contributions. The project's growth from a single-vehicle GS450h controller to a universal VCU supporting dozens of drivetrains and chargers was built on exactly this kind of contribution.

----

== The Openinverter Framework ==

The ZombieVerter firmware is built on Johannes Huebner's openinverter firmware framework (</code>libopeninv<code>). Understanding the framework is important for anyone doing serious firmware work:

* '''Parameter system''' — all configurable parameters are defined in a structured way that automatically exposes them in the web interface
* '''CAN class architecture''' — each device (inverter, charger, BMS) is implemented as a CAN class that can be selected at runtime via the </code>inverter<code> / </code>chargerType` parameters
* '''IO Matrix''' — the flexible input/output assignment system introduced in V2.00A

Johannes's GitHub and the openinverter forum are the best resources for understanding the framework internals.

----

''Source: github.com/damienmaguire/Stm32-vcu · openinverter.org/forum · Damien Maguire @Evbmw''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''