= I03 — Toyota Lexus GS450h Transaxle =

'''Track:''' Inverter Integration  
'''Prerequisites:''' I00 — Generic Inverter Integration Principles, W07 — CAN Bus Wiring  
'''Audience:''' Intermediate  
'''Video source:''' "ZombieVerter VCU Prius Inverter Connection" series (May–Jun 2024); "2013 Lexus GS450h Transmission Wire Harness DIY EV Conversion" (Jun 2025, Good Enuff Garage)  
'''Estimated reading time:''' 20 minutes

----

== Why the GS450h is Different ==

The Lexus GS450h (and GS300h) transaxle is one of the most popular choices for rear-wheel-drive EV conversions — particularly for classic American muscle cars, trucks, and anything with a traditional longitudinal drivetrain layout. It is, however, the most mechanically complex integration the ZombieVerter supports.

Key differences from Leaf/Outlander/Prius integrations:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Feature || ! Leaf / Outlander || ! GS450h
|-
| Drive unit || | Transverse FWD || | Longitudinal RWD
|-
| Motor count || | 1 traction motor || | 2 motors (MG1 + MG2)
|-
| Reverse gear || | Software (negative torque) || | Physical gear in transmission
|-
| Physical shifter || | Not needed || | Required (Park/Reverse/Neutral/Drive)
|-
| Inverter comms || | CAN bus || | Synchronous serial (8-wire)
|-
| Gearbox || | None (single fixed ratio) || | Two-speed (high ≈ 2:1, low ≈ 4:1)
|}

----

== The Two Motors: MG1 and MG2 ==

The GS450h contains two motor-generators:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Motor || ! Role
|-
| **MG1** || | Generator / starter — primarily used for engine starting and power split in the OEM hybrid system
|-
| **MG2** || | Traction motor — the primary drive motor in an EV conversion
|}

In a ZombieVerter conversion, MG2 is used for traction. MG1 may or may not be utilised depending on the conversion.

----

== Synchronous Serial Interface ==

Unlike the Leaf (CAN) and Outlander (CAN), the GS450h inverter uses a '''synchronous serial bus''' — an 8-wire interface specific to Toyota/Lexus systems. This is also used for the Toyota Prius Gen3 and the Lexus GS300h.

'''Why this matters:'''
* The VCU's CAN buses are not used for inverter communication with GS450h
* The sync serial wires connect to specific pins on the ZombieVerter's 56-pin connector
* The wiring is more complex than CAN (8 wires vs 2)

=== Sync Serial Pin Assignments (ZombieVerter) ===

The four synchronous serial pairs connect to the following VCU pins:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Signal pair || ! VCU Pin (−/negative) || ! VCU Pin (+/positive) || ! Notes
|-
| REQ || | 16 || | 17 || | Request
|-
| CLK || | 18 || | 19 || | Clock
|-
| MTH || | 20 || | 21 || | Motor to hybrid (inverter → VCU)
|-
| HTM || | 22 || | 23 || | Hybrid to motor (VCU → inverter)
|}

: Pin assignments may vary slightly between firmware versions and board revisions — always verify against the current wiki pinout diagram.

----

== Inverter Connector ==

The GS450h inverter connector is a large multi-pin connector (approximately 36 pins) that combines:
* The synchronous serial interface (8 pins used)
* Power (12V supply — 2 wires redundant positive, 2 wires redundant ground)
* Resolver connections - the resolver signals for MG1 and MG2, used for motor position sensing. This is '''OEM harness territory''' — use the original Toyota/Lexus wire harness wherever possible. Building resolver cables from scratch is possible but requires shielded twisted pairs and careful attention to wiring.

=== Power Wiring to the Inverter Connector ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Wire colour (OEM) || ! Function || ! Notes
|-
| Green (×2) || | 12V positive supply to inverter || | Two wires, combined — add an inline fuse
|-
| White/black (×2) || | Ground || | Two wires, combined
|}

The redundant positive wires run from the connector back to a common point and rejoin — they are Toyota's built-in redundancy. In an EV conversion, join them together and run to a fused 12V supply.

Start with a 1A fuse and work upwards if it blows (2A, 3A, 5A). The inverter draws more than the VCU at startup.

----

== Wire Harness — OEM vs. DIY ==

=== Use OEM Harnesses Where Possible ===

The synchronous serial wiring is particularly important to get right. Toyota's harness uses:
* Twisted shielded pairs for the sync serial signals
* Specific loop-back connections within the connector (wires that exit and re-enter the same connector)
* Shielding for EMI protection

Building these from scratch is achievable but error-prone. Buying the OEM harness and extracting only what you need is strongly recommended.

=== What to Extract from the GS450h Harness ===

The GS450h "engine wire" harness (also called the transmission wire harness) contains everything you need but also a lot you don't need. A typical harness extraction yields:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! What you extract || ! Used for
|-
| MG1 resolver cable (4-pin or 10-pin connector) || | Motor position sensing
|-
| MG2 resolver cable || | Motor position sensing
|-
| Shift solenoid harness (SL1, SL2) || | Transmission gear control (high/low)
|-
| Neutral safety switch harness || | Park/Reverse/Neutral/Drive detection
|}

You'll only use approximately 12% of the total harness — the rest is OEM engine/hybrid control wiring that can be discarded.

=== Harness Identification Tips ===

When buying a used GS450h harness:
* Look for the "squiggly" plastic guide that runs along the transmission side
* The resolver connectors are at one end — MG1 and MG2 each have their own plug
* The resolver plugs are at the '''opposite end''' from the main inverter connection — if a harness is cut at the wrong place, you lose the resolver plugs
* The neutral safety switch plug is gray with plastic shielding, on a branch that includes many ground wires
* Gen 3 (2007–2011) and Gen 4 (2013+) harnesses differ — Gen 3 is the supported conversion platform as of current firmware

=== Resolver Cable Identification ===

On a 4th gen harness:
* MG2 resolver: gray/green wires + temp sensor wires (red/blue)
* MG1 resolver: separate plug, typically 4 or 10 pins
* Temp sensor wires must be cut (they don't have through-plugs, only connect on one end)

=== Shift Solenoids ===

The GS450h has two speeds — high gear (~2:1 ratio) and low gear (~4:1 ratio). The shift solenoids SL1 and SL2 control which gear the transmission is in. In ZombieVerter, these are controlled via:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU pin assignment || ! Function
|-
| Trans SL1− || | Transmission solenoid 1 ground-side control
|-
| Trans SL2− || | Transmission solenoid 2 ground-side control
|}

For basic operation, many builders leave the transmission in high gear and don't connect the shift solenoids. The zombie does have parameters for managing gear shifts, but this requires more advanced configuration.

=== Gear Shifter Switch ===

The gear shifter switch tells the VCU which gear position the physical shifter is in (Park, Reverse, Neutral, Drive). The switch physically activates the parking pawil when in PARK, all other positions are simply an electrical switch. This is wired to the ZombieVerter which reads the switch and responds accordingly — it will not send torque in Park or Neutral.

For bench testing without the full shifter assembly, specific pins on the Gear Shifter switch can be shorted to simulate a Drive signal and allow torque commands. Refer to the openinverter wiki for the specific pins.

----

== VCU Parameter Settings ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Parameter || ! Value for GS450h
|-
| `inverter` || | `2` (GS450H)
|-
| `vehicle` || | Match your donor vehicle (Classic, BMW E46, etc.)
|-
| `transmission` || | `auto` or per your shifter setup
|-
| `gearLever` || | Match your gear selector type
|}

----

== Oil Pump ==

The GS450h inverter has its own oil cooling circuit with an electric oil pump. The ZombieVerter controls this pump via:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU function || ! Type || ! Notes
|-
| `GS450Hpump` || | PWM OUTPUT || | Controls oil pump speed proportionally
|}

Assign <code>GS450Hpump</code> to the <code>Pump PWM</code> pin in the configurable output assignments. The pump must run when the inverter is operating to provide oil pressure to the transmission to allow traction

----

== Bench Testing the Sync Serial Connection ==

A basic connectivity check without HV:

# Connect sync serial wires (8 wires, pins 16–23) from VCU to inverter connector
# Connect 12V power to inverter connector (green wires + ground)
# Apply permanent 12V to VCU (Pins 55, 56)
# Connect to web interface
# Go to Spot Values — check <code>temphs</code> (heat sink temperature)

If <code>temphs</code> shows a non-zero, plausible temperature value (e.g., 25–35°C at room temperature), the sync serial connection is working and the inverter is communicating. If it shows 0 or negative, the sync serial is not connected correctly.

: Note: The inverter will draw over 1A from the 12V supply at startup. If using a bench power supply, ensure it is set for at least 2A output.

----

== Common GS450h Integration Issues ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Issue || ! Cause || ! Fix
|-
| No temp reading from inverter || | Sync serial not connected or wrong pins || | Re-verify pin assignments against current wiki pinout
|-
| Ground loop / noise interference || | Laptop USB connected to logic analyser during same test || | Disconnect USB/logic analyser, check chassis grounds
|-
| System won't stay in run after restart || | ISA shunt on ignition-switched power || | Move shunt to permanent power supply
|-
| Resolver errors || | Swapped MG1/MG2 connectors || | Swap resolver plugs
|}

----

== What's Next ==

* '''I04''' — Mitsubishi Outlander PHEV Drive Unit
* '''A01''' — Regen Tuning (GS450h has specific regen considerations)

----

''Source: "ZombieVerter VCU Prius Inverter Connection" series — Good Enuff Garage (May 2024) | "2013 Lexus GS450h Transmission Wire Harness" — Good Enuff Garage (Jun 2025) | openinverter.org wiki''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''
