= W03 — Contactor & Precharge Circuit =

'''Track:''' Wiring  
'''Prerequisites:''' H01 — VCU Hardware Walkthrough, F03 — EV Drivetrain Fundamentals  
'''Audience:''' All levels  
'''Estimated reading time:''' 15 minutes

----

== Why This Module Matters ==

Contactor and precharge wiring is the most safety-critical part of a ZombieVerter installation. Getting it wrong can result in:
* Violent inrush current that welds contactors closed permanently
* Failure to enter run mode (the most common first-start problem)
* Unexpected HV live conditions on the vehicle chassis

Read this module completely before wiring. Do not skip the UDC section.

----

== What the Contactor System Does ==

The ZombieVerter manages three contactors in a standard EV conversion:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Contactor || ! Purpose
|-
| **Negative** || | Connects the battery negative to the HV system ground
|-
| **Precharge** || | Connects HV positive through a resistor, to slowly charge inverter capacitors
|-
| **Positive (Main)** || | Connects battery positive directly to the HV bus once precharge is complete
|}

The sequencing logic is:

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
START signal received
        │
        ▼
Negative contactor CLOSES  ◄─── always first
        │
        ▼
Precharge contactor CLOSES ◄─── current limited by precharge resistor
        │
        ▼
UDC voltage rises toward pack voltage
        │
        ▼
UDC ≥ udcsw setpoint? ──── NO ──── wait (up to 5 seconds)
        │                                │
       YES                        PRECHARGE FAULT
        │
        ▼
Main (positive) contactor CLOSES
        │
        ▼
VCU enters RUN mode  ──── opmode = "run", invstat = "on"
</syntaxhighlight>

----

== UDC — The Most Important Concept in This Module ==

'''UDC is the VCU's measurement of HV bus voltage.''' It is the single most critical input to the contactor sequencing logic.

Without a valid UDC reading, the ZombieVerter '''will fail precharge and never enter run mode.''' This is the most common cause of first-start failures.

The VCU can receive UDC from several sources, selected via the <code>shuntType</code> parameter:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! shuntType value || ! Source
|-
| `ISA` || | ISA IVT current/voltage shunt (most common)
|-
| `SBOX` || | BMW S-BOX battery management unit
|-
| `VAG` || | Volkswagen/Audi battery system
|-
| `LEAF` || | Nissan Leaf inverter (reports pack voltage via CAN)
|}

'''You must configure <code>shuntType</code> to match your actual hardware.''' If it is set to a source that is not present or not communicating, UDC will read zero and precharge will fail immediately.

=== ISA Shunt — Permanent Power Requirement ===

If you are using an ISA IVT shunt (the most common choice), it must have '''permanent 12V power''' — the same always-on supply as the VCU itself. The ISA shunt continuously monitors and reports UDC.

If the shunt is powered from an ignition-switched supply, it will lose its UDC reading when the key is off. When you next turn the key and start precharge, the VCU may see a stale or zero UDC value and behave unpredictably.

: '''Rule:''' ISA shunt power = always on. Same feed as the VCU.

----

== Contactor Wiring ==

=== Electrical Concept: Low-Side Switching ===

All contactor outputs on the ZombieVerter are '''low-side switches'''. This means:
* The VCU output pin connects to the '''ground leg''' of the contactor coil
* When the VCU activates the output, it pulls that pin to ground, completing the circuit
* The '''positive leg''' of every contactor coil must be connected to 12V+

'''Never connect 12V+ to the VCU contactor output pins.''' These are ground-side switching outputs only.

=== Pin Assignments ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! VCU Pin || ! Function || ! Connects to
|-
| Pin 31 || | Negative contactor || | Ground leg of negative contactor coil
|-
| Pin 33 || | Positive (main) contactor || | Ground leg of positive contactor coil
|-
| Pin 34 || | Precharge contactor || | Ground leg of precharge contactor coil
|}

=== Wiring Diagram (Conceptual) ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
12V+ ──────────────────┬──────────────────┬──────────────────┐
                       │                  │                  │
                    [Neg Coil+]        [Pre Coil+]       [Main Coil+]
                    [Neg Coil−]        [Pre Coil−]       [Main Coil−]
                       │                  │                  │
                    Pin 31             Pin 34             Pin 33
                    (VCU)              (VCU)              (VCU)
                       │                  │                  │
12V GND ───────────────┴──────────────────┴──────────────────┘
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Contactor Polarity ===

Some contactors are polarity-sensitive — their coil has a defined positive and negative terminal. If wired backwards, they will not close (or may close but with reduced hold force and reduced life). Check your specific contactor datasheet.

----

== Precharge Resistor ==

The precharge resistor limits current flow during the precharge phase, protecting both the contactor and the inverter capacitors from inrush damage.

'''Sizing guidelines:'''
* Typical values: 40Ω–100Ω at 50W–100W rating
* Higher resistance = slower precharge (more protection, but must complete within 5 seconds)
* Lower resistance = faster precharge (less protection, may stress contactors)
* 100Ω / 100W is a common and safe starting point for most conversions up to ~400V

'''Placement:''' The precharge resistor connects in series with the precharge contactor, between the positive battery terminal and the positive HV bus (inverter side).

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
Battery +  ──── [Main Contactor] ──────────────────────── HV Bus +
                                                              │
                 [Precharge Contactor] ── [Resistor] ─────────┘
</syntaxhighlight>

----

== UDC Measurement Point — ISA Shunt ==

The ISA shunt must be positioned to measure the voltage at the correct point. The shunt's U1 terminal reads voltage relative to HV ground.

'''During precharge, U1 should be connected to the HV bus on the inverter side of the main contactor.''' As the precharge resistor charges the inverter capacitors, U1 rises toward pack voltage. When it crosses <code>udcsw</code>, the VCU closes the main contactor.

A common mistake is connecting U1 to the battery side of the main contactor. In this position, U1 reads full pack voltage immediately (before precharge even starts), and the VCU will try to close the main contactor without actually precharging the inverter capacitors — potentially welding the main contactor on first use.

: '''Check:''' During initial power-up with no HV connected, U1 should read 0V. Apply HV with only precharge closed — U1 should rise slowly from 0V toward pack voltage. Only then will the VCU close the main contactor.

----

== Key Parameters ==

These parameters control contactor and precharge behaviour:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Parameter || ! Description || ! Typical Value
|-
| `udcmin` || | Minimum pack voltage — below this, VCU will not enter run mode || | Set to ~80% of your minimum expected pack voltage (e.g. 20V for bench testing)
|-
| `udclim` || | Maximum pack voltage — above this, VCU derates || | Set just above your fully charged pack voltage
|-
| `udcsw` || | Voltage threshold that triggers main contactor close || | Set to ~95% of your nominal pack voltage
|-
| `shuntType` || | Source of UDC measurement || | Match to your hardware: ISA, SBOX, VAG, or LEAF
|}

=== Common First-Start Mistakes ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Symptom || ! Likely Cause
|-
| UDC reads 0, precharge never completes || | `shuntType` wrong, shunt not powered, shunt not initialised, shunt CAN bus not connected
|-
| UDC reads full pack voltage immediately, main contactor fires instantly || | ISA U1 connected to battery side instead of inverter side
|-
| Precharge times out (stays in PRECHARGE state) || | `udcsw` set too high, precharge resistor too large, shunt not reporting correctly
|-
| VCU never attempts precharge || | `udcmin` set too high (pack voltage is below the minimum threshold)
|-
| Precharge completes but VCU won't enter run mode || | `din_break` is showing "on" — brake signal is active or stuck, blocking run mode
|}

----

== ISA Shunt Initialisation ==

A new ISA shunt must be initialised before it will communicate on CAN. This is a one-time procedure:

# Wire the ISA shunt to permanent 12V and the correct CAN bus
# In the web interface under '''Comms''', set <code>shuntCan</code> to the CAN bus the shunt is connected to
# Save parameters to flash
# Under '''Comms''', set <code>ISAMode</code> to '''Init'''
# Save parameters to flash
# Power cycle the VCU and shunt simultaneously (they should be on the same 12V feed)
# The shunt initialises
# Set <code>ISAMode</code> back to '''Normal'''
# Save parameters to flash
# Reboot the VCU

'''If initialisation fails:'''
Separate the shunt and VCU power supplies. Power on the shunt first, wait 2–3 seconds, then power on the VCU. This delay allows the shunt to fully boot before the VCU attempts to communicate with it. This has resolved initialisation failures for a number of users.

----

== Contactor Firing During Precharge — Inverter Enable Relay ==

One subtle but important wiring detail: the inverter (and charger, DCDC) should not receive its 12V "ignition/enable" signal until the VCU is ready to energise it. Premature inverter power-up can cause:
* CAN bus conflicts before the VCU has configured the inverter
* Inverter self-initialisation that conflicts with VCU sequencing

The ZombieVerter controls an external relay (via Pin 32, low-side switching) to provide a switched 12V "ignition" signal to these devices. This relay should only fire after the VCU is in a valid state.

'''Relay wiring:'''
<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
12V+ ──── [Relay coil +]
          [Relay coil −] ──── Pin 32 (VCU) ──── GND
          [Relay switch NO] ──── 12V+
          [Relay switch COM] ──── Inverter/charger enable/ignition pin
</syntaxhighlight>

Check that this relay is firing during precharge by watching the inverter's power indicator or CAN traffic when you apply the Start signal.

----

== Troubleshooting Checklist ==

Before assuming a hardware fault, verify all of the following:

* [ ] <code>shuntType</code> matches actual hardware
* [ ] ISA shunt has permanent 12V power (not ignition-switched)
* [ ] ISA shunt has been initialised (ISAMode Init → Normal cycle)
* [ ] ISA shunt CAN bus matches <code>shuntCan</code> parameter setting
* [ ] CAN bus has correct termination (120Ω at each end of the bus)
* [ ] ISA shunt U1 is connected to inverter side of main contactor (not battery side)
* [ ] All contactor coil positive leads are connected to 12V+
* [ ] All contactor coil negative leads are connected to the correct VCU pins (31, 33, 34)
* [ ] <code>udcmin</code> is set to a sane value (try 20V for bench testing)
* [ ] <code>udcsw</code> is set below actual pack voltage
* [ ] <code>din_break</code> reads "off" in spot values (brake signal not stuck on)
* [ ] Inverter enable relay is firing during precharge (Pin 32)

----

== What's Next ==

* '''W04''' — HVIL: High Voltage Interlock Loop
* '''W07''' — CAN Bus Wiring: termination and topology
* '''C03''' — Essential Parameters: First Start

----

''Source: openinverter.org/wiki/ZombieVerter_VCU | openinverter.org forum threads''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''
