= A03 — BMS Integration =

'''Track:''' Advanced  
'''Prerequisites:''' W03 — Contactor & Precharge Circuit, C03 — Essential Parameters: First Start  
'''Audience:''' All levels  
'''Estimated reading time:''' 12 minutes

----

== Overview ==

The ZombieVerter does '''not''' implement cell-level BMS functions. It reads pack-level data from a separate BMS via CAN and enforces current limits from that BMS. This is an intentional division of labour:

* '''ISA shunt''' — pack-level monitoring (voltage, current, SoC). Feeds precharge logic and contactor control.
* '''Cell BMS (SimpBMS, Orion, etc.)''' — cell-level monitoring, balancing, per-cell protection. Sends charge/discharge limits to VCU over CAN.
* '''VCU''' — enforces BMS limits, manages contactors, controls inverter and charger.

----

== ISA IVT Shunt ==

The ISA IVT-S shunt is the recommended pack-level monitor for all ZombieVerter builds. It provides continuous measurement of voltage, current, power, and state of charge over CAN.

=== What It Measures ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Measurement || ! Spot value
|-
| Pack voltage (U1) || | `udc`
|-
| DC current || | `idc`
|-
| State of charge || | `soc`
|-
| Power (W) || | `power`
|-
| Coulomb count (Ah) || | `curin`
|}

=== Permanent 12V — The Critical Rule ===

: '''🔴 The ISA shunt must have always-on 12V — the same permanent feed as the VCU itself.'''

If powered from an ignition-switched supply, the shunt loses its SoC state and UDC reading when the key is off. On the next startup, UDC reads zero → precharge fails every time.

'''Rule:''' ISA shunt power = always on. Same feed as VCU. Never ignition-switched.

=== U1 Placement — Inverter Side of Main Contactor ===

The ISA shunt's U1 voltage sense wire must connect to the HV bus on the '''inverter side''' of the main contactor — not the battery side.

During precharge, U1 rises from 0V toward pack voltage as the inverter capacitors charge through the precharge resistor. When U1 crosses <code>udcsw</code>, the VCU closes the main contactor.

If U1 is connected to the battery side, it reads full pack voltage immediately, and the VCU tries to close the main contactor before the capacitors are charged — potentially welding the contacts on first use.

=== Initialisation (One-Time) ===

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
shuntType = ISA
shuntCan  = CAN1   (match your wiring)

→ ISAMode = Init → save to flash → power cycle VCU and shunt simultaneously
→ ISAMode = Normal → save to flash → reboot VCU
</syntaxhighlight>

If initialisation fails, power the shunt 2–3 seconds before the VCU. This allows the shunt to fully boot before the VCU attempts to communicate.

=== BMW S-BOX Alternative ===

Set <code>shuntType</code> = SBOX. The BMW Safety Box provides pack voltage monitoring and HVIL (High Voltage Interlock Loop) in one unit. Popular in BMW-based builds. Configure in Comms parameters.

----

== Cell-Level BMS Options ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! BMS || ! Notes
|-
| **SimpBMS** || | Most popular. Open-source. Designed for EV conversions. Connects to Leaf cell modules via UART (120-pin Leaf BMS connector), sends charge/discharge limits to VCU over CAN.
|-
| **Orion BMS** || | Commercial, professional-grade. Plug-and-play CAN integration with VCU. High cost but very reliable.
|-
| **Nissan Leaf ZE1 BMS** || | Salvaged from 62kWh Leaf. Native Leaf cell integration. Supported in V2.30A.
|-
| **Renault Kangoo BMS** || | 36-module BMS. Added V2.20A.
|-
| **BMW S-BOX** || | Combined pack monitor + HVIL. Set `shuntType` = SBOX.
|-
| **VW E-BOX** || | Volkswagen equivalent to S-BOX. Set `shuntType` = VAG.
|}

----

== How BMS Limits Work ==

The BMS sends maximum charge and discharge current limits to the VCU via CAN. The VCU derates inverter torque commands and charge current to stay within those limits.

<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
BMS sends via CAN → VCU enforces:
  Max discharge current → caps motor torque demand
  Max charge current    → caps regen / charge current
  BMS fault / over-volt → VCU opens contactors
</syntaxhighlight>

=== BMS Parameters ===

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Parameter || ! What it does
|-
| `bmsCan` || | CAN bus the BMS is connected to
|-
| `bmsType` || | BMS protocol (SimpBMS, Orion, ZE1, etc.)
|-
| `maxDischargeCurrent` || | VCU hard limit (A) — overrides BMS if lower
|-
| `maxChargeCurrent` || | VCU hard limit for regen and charging
|}

: '''⚠ Set <code>bmsCan</code> correctly.''' If BMS shares a bus with the inverter, check for CAN ID conflicts. The ISA shunt and cell BMS can be on different CAN buses — the ISA shunt often runs at 1 Mbps while most BMS devices run at 500 kbps, so they typically need separate buses anyway.

----

== ISA vs Cell BMS — Both Needed ==

The ISA shunt and a cell BMS are complementary, not interchangeable:

* The '''ISA shunt''' provides UDC for precharge logic and idc for power monitoring. Without it (or <code>shuntType</code> = SBOX/VAG), precharge sequencing cannot work.
* The '''cell BMS''' provides per-cell voltage monitoring, temperature, balancing, and current limits. Without it, you have no protection against individual cell over-voltage or thermal runaway.

From V2.20A, it is possible to run with <code>shuntType</code> = None and use BMS data from the inverter and BMS directly for pack-level monitoring — demonstrated in Damien's Mitsubishi L200 truck build using a Leaf ZE1 battery pack with integrated BMS.

----

''Source: openinverter.org/wiki · Damien Maguire @Evbmw''  
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''
