= C03 — Essential Parameters: First Start =

'''Track:''' Firmware & Configuration<br>
'''Prerequisites:''' C02 — Web Interface Walkthrough, W02, W03<br>
'''Audience:''' All levels<br>
'''Estimated reading time:''' 15 minutes

== Overview ==

This module walks you through the minimum parameter set required to bring a ZombieVerter system to life for the first time. Follow these steps in order. Do not skip ahead to HV testing until the LV checks are complete.

== Before You Start: LV Bench Test ==

You should be able to complete the entire first-start sequence with '''12V only''' — no HV battery connected.

Required for LV bench test:
* ZombieVerter VCU with 12V power
* Wi-Fi connected device with web interface open
* Throttle pedal (or a potentiometer simulating one)
* Brake signal (simple switch to 12V)
* Forward/Reverse signal (switches to 12V)
* Ignition ON and START signals (switches to 12V)
* Contactor coils connected (they will click — no HV needed)
* ISA shunt connected and initialised (see Module W08)

== Step 1: Set the Inverter Type ==

'''Parameter:''' <code>Inverter</code> (under General Setup)

{| class="wikitable"
! Your inverter !! Set <code>Inverter</code> to
|-
| Nissan Leaf (any gen) || 1
|-
| Lexus GS450h || 2
|-
| Toyota Prius Gen3 || 5
|-
| Mitsubishi Outlander (rear) || 8
|-
| OpenInverter board || 4
|-
| Nothing yet || 0
|}

Save to flash.

== Step 2: Set the Shunt Type ==

'''Parameter:''' <code>ShuntType</code> (under General Setup)

{| class="wikitable"
! Your UDC source !! Set <code>ShuntType</code> to
|-
| ISA IVT-S shunt || ISA
|-
| BMW S-BOX || SBOX
|-
| VW/Audi system || VAG
|-
| Nissan Leaf inverter || LEAF
|-
| None || None
|}

Save to flash.

=== ISA Shunt Initialisation Procedure ===

{{Warning|The ISA shunt and VCU must share the same permanent 12V feed — required for the init sequence and for accurate readings when ignition is off.}}

# Wire the ISA shunt to permanent 12V+ and the CAN bus
# Set <code>ShuntType = ISA</code> and <code>ShuntCan</code> to the correct CAN bus — save to flash
# Set <code>IsaInit = 1</code> — save to flash
# Power cycle the VCU and shunt '''at the same time''' (shared 12V feed makes this automatic)
# Verify <code>udc</code> in Spot Values shows a reading
# '''Set <code>IsaInit = 0</code> — save to flash'''
# Reboot the VCU

{{Warning|<code>IsaInit</code> is not cleared automatically by the firmware. Leaving it at 1 re-runs the full init sequence — including coulomb counter reset — on every boot. Always set it back to 0 after a successful init.}}

{{Note|If the shunt doesn't initialise: power the shunt 2–3 seconds before the VCU. This fixes a timing issue seen with some units.}}

For the complete IVT-S reference see '''W08'''.

== Step 3: Set the CAN Bus Assignments ==

'''Parameters:''' <code>InverterCan</code>, <code>ShuntCan</code> (under General Setup)

{{Note|Known documentation issue: CAN1 and CAN2 are labelled in reverse in some older wiring diagrams. If your inverter is not communicating despite correct wiring, try swapping the bus assignment parameter value before rewiring.}}

Common starting configuration:
* <code>InverterCan</code> = CAN1 (or whichever bus your inverter is on)
* <code>ShuntCan</code> = match your shunt wiring (CAN1 or CAN2)

Save to flash.

== Step 4: Set Voltage Limits ==

'''Parameters:''' <code>udcmin</code>, <code>udclim</code>, <code>udcsw</code>

{| class="wikitable"
! Parameter !! Firmware default !! What to set
|-
| <code>udcmin</code> || '''450V''' || ~80% of minimum pack voltage
|-
| <code>udclim</code> || '''520V''' || Just above fully charged pack voltage
|-
| <code>udcsw</code> || '''330V''' || ~95% of nominal pack voltage
|}

{{Warning|<code>udcmin</code> defaults to 450V and <code>udclim</code> to 520V. Both must be lowered for any sub-400V build or the VCU will never enter run mode.}}

For LV bench testing with no HV, set <code>udcsw</code> to 15–20V so precharge completes immediately.

{{Note|Precharge timeout is 5 seconds — hardcoded in firmware, not configurable. If <code>udc</code> does not reach <code>udcsw</code> within 5 seconds, the VCU posts <code>ERR_PRECHARGE</code> and enters <code>MOD_PCHFAIL</code>.}}

Save to flash.

== Step 5: Configure Throttle ==

'''Parameters:''' <code>potmin</code>, <code>potmax</code>, <code>potmode</code>, <code>throtmin</code>, <code>throtmax</code>

Set <code>potmode</code> first:
* <code>SingleChannel</code> — one throttle pot
* <code>DualChannel</code> — two throttle pots (recommended)

Watch the <code>pot</code> spot value while moving the throttle and set:
* <code>potmin</code> = just '''above''' the resting ADC reading
* <code>potmax</code> = just '''below''' the full-travel ADC reading

{{Warning|ZombieVerter <code>potmin</code>/<code>potmax</code> are set '''inside''' the mechanical travel range — opposite to most systems. This ensures a sensor failure or disconnected connector causes safe throttle cutoff.}}

Then set <code>throtmin = 0</code> and <code>throtmax = 100</code>.

{{Warning|<code>throtmax</code> defaults to 100. If your throttle does nothing, verify this parameter — it is the most common first-start issue.}}

Save to flash.

== Step 6: Verify Brake Signal ==

Check <code>din_brake</code> in Spot Values:
* Should show '''off''' with brake not pressed
* Should show '''on''' with brake pressed

{{Warning|<code>din_brake</code> must be "off" for the VCU to allow torque output. If stuck "on" with no brake pressed, check switch wiring (NO vs NC), floating pin, or add pull-down resistor.}}

== Step 7: Verify Direction Inputs ==

Apply 12V to Pin 54 (forward) — <code>din_forward</code> should show "on".<br>
Apply 12V to Pin 53 (reverse) — <code>din_reverse</code> should show "on".

== Step 8: First Precharge Test (LV Only) ==

# Apply ignition ON to Pin 15
# Briefly apply START to Pin 52 (momentary pulse)
# Watch Spot Values — contactors should click in sequence, <code>opmode</code> should reach <code>run</code>

'''If stuck in PRECHARGE:'''
* Is <code>udc</code> reading a value? If zero, shunt not communicating — see W08
* Is <code>udcsw</code> reachable? Lower to 5V for LV bench test
* Timeout is 5 seconds — if exceeded, VCU enters <code>MOD_PCHFAIL</code>

'''If <code>opmode</code> never reaches "run":'''
* Check <code>din_brake</code> is "off"
* Check <code>din_forward</code> or <code>din_reverse</code> is "on"
* Check <code>udc</code> is above <code>udcmin</code>

== Step 9: First Torque Test (LV Only) ==

With <code>opmode = run</code>:
# Apply forward direction (Pin 54 to 12V)
# Slowly press throttle
# Watch <code>potnom</code> rise 0→100 and <code>torque</code> rise proportionally

== Complete First-Start Parameter Checklist ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Parameter !! Firmware default !! What to set !! Notes
|-
| <code>Inverter</code> || 0 || Match your hardware || General Setup
|-
| <code>ShuntType</code> || None || Match your hardware ||
|-
| <code>InverterCan</code> || CAN1 || Match your wiring ||
|-
| <code>ShuntCan</code> || CAN1 || Match your wiring ||
|-
| <code>udcmin</code> || '''450V''' || ~80% of min pack voltage || ⚠ Must lower for all sub-400V builds
|-
| <code>udclim</code> || '''520V''' || Just above fully charged pack voltage ||
|-
| <code>udcsw</code> || '''330V''' || ~95% nominal / 15–20V for LV bench ||
|-
| <code>potmode</code> || SingleChannel || Match wiring ||
|-
| <code>potmin</code> || 0 || Just above off-throttle ADC || Inside mechanical travel
|-
| <code>potmax</code> || 4095 || Just below WOT ADC || Inside mechanical travel
|-
| <code>pot2min</code> || 4095 || Same for channel 2 (dual only) ||
|-
| <code>pot2max</code> || 4095 || Same for channel 2 (dual only) ||
|-
| <code>throtmin</code> || -100 || 0 ||
|-
| <code>throtmax</code> || '''100''' || 100 || Verify if throttle unresponsive
|-
| <code>throtmaxRev</code> || 30 || Raise if more reverse torque needed ||
|-
| <code>revlim</code> || 6000 rpm || Set for your motor ||
|-
| <code>IsaInit</code> || 0 || Toggle 1→0 to init ISA shunt || Must reset to 0 after init — see W08
|-
| <code>Vehicle</code> || BMW_E46 || None or Classic || Unless integrating with OEM cluster
|}

== What's Next ==

* '''C04''' — Throttle Calibration
* '''C05''' — CAN Configuration
* '''C06''' — Fault Codes & Status Flags
* '''W08''' — ISA IVT-S Shunt: Complete Reference

----

''Source: openinverter.org/wiki · ZombieVerter firmware param_prj.h, stm32_vcu.cpp''<br>
''Last verified against firmware: V2.40A''
