= I04 — Mitsubishi Outlander PHEV Drive Unit =

'''Track:''' Integration<br>
'''Prerequisites:''' C03 — Essential Parameters: First Start, W03 — Contactor & Precharge<br>
'''Audience:''' Intermediate<br>
'''Estimated reading time:''' 12 minutes

----

== Overview ==

The Mitsubishi Outlander PHEV contains separate front and rear drive units — each with its own motor, inverter, and three-phase connection. Either or both can be used in a conversion. The interface is CAN-based, similar to the Nissan Leaf but with Mitsubishi-specific message IDs.

'''Front drive unit VCU parameter:''' <code>inverter</code> = (check current wiki — Outlander front)<br>
'''Rear drive unit VCU parameter:''' <code>inverter</code> = 8 (RearOutlander)

'''Note on versions:''' Early firmware used <code>inverter</code> = 6 for Outlander, which has since been deprecated. Use <code>inverter</code> = 8 for the rear unit. Check the current wiki for the front unit value as this has changed across firmware versions.

----

== Front vs Rear Drive Unit ==

The Outlander PHEV has distinct front and rear units:

{| class="wikitable"
! !! Front !! Rear
|-
| Motor type || PMAC || PMAC
|-
| Peak power || ~60kW || ~60kW
|-
| Orientation || Transverse FWD || Longitudinal RWD
|-
| Interface || CAN || CAN
|-
| ZV support || Partial — check wiki || Full — V2.15A+
|-
| Common use || Front-wheel drive conversions || Rear-wheel drive conversions, longitudinal builds
|}

The rear unit is the more commonly used in ZombieVerter conversions and has more complete firmware support.

----

== Minimum Voltage ==

{{Warning|The Outlander inverter requires a minimum of approximately 200V to operate. Below this threshold the inverter will not produce torque. This is hardcoded in the inverter and cannot be changed from the VCU.}}

For bench testing: use a bench power supply at a low voltage to verify CAN communication. The inverter will communicate below 200V — it just won't spin. You need pack voltage to verify full operation.

----

== Wiring ==

The Outlander inverter needs:

{| class="wikitable"
! Signal !! Notes
|-
| 12V+ permanent || To inverter logic power
|-
| Ground || Chassis ground
|-
| CAN H / CAN L || 500 kbps, VCU CAN1 or CAN2
|-
| HV+ / HV− || Via contactors and precharge as normal
|-
| Motor three-phase || Three-phase AC to motor (integral in most units)
|-
| Resolver || Motor position sensor — OEM harness or equivalent
|}

The motor and inverter are typically inseparable in the Outlander unit — the motor is integrated into the transaxle housing and the inverter bolts directly on. You take them together from the donor vehicle.

----

== The Outlander OBC — Two 12V Feeds ==

The Outlander OBC (onboard charger) is a separate unit that provides both AC charging and DC-DC conversion. It is covered in Module A02.

The most common Outlander build failure: wiring only one of the two 12V power inputs to the OBC. Both must be connected. See A02 for full OBC wiring.

----

== OEM Harness ==

For the Outlander drive unit, obtain as much of the OEM harness as possible. The resolver connector and cooling system connectors have non-standard pinouts that are significantly easier to work with if you have the original plugs.

Mitsubishi forum resources (as distinct from openinverter) can be valuable for Outlander-specific pinout information — Damien noted he sourced the initial CAN log data that enabled Outlander support from a Mitsubishi enthusiast forum.

----

== Cooling ==

The Outlander drive unit requires active liquid cooling. The OEM system uses a dedicated inverter coolant circuit separate from the engine coolant. In a conversion:

* Electric coolant pump required (12V, controllable)
* Assign <code>CoolantPump</code> to a VCU digital output pin
* The pump should run whenever the inverter is active — assign to activate in precharge and run mode

----

== Cabin Heater — CAN Variant Only (2016+) ==

The Outlander PHEV uses two different water heater designs across model years:

{| class="wikitable"
! Variant !! Years !! Interface !! ZombieVerter support
|-
| Resistive (non-CAN) || Pre-2016 || Direct 12V/HV switching — no CAN || '''Not supported'''
|-
| CAN-controlled || 2016+ || CAN bus commands || '''Supported'''
|}

{{Warning|The ZombieVerter can only control the CAN-bus water heater from 2016+ Outlander PHEVs. Pre-2016 units use a resistive heater with no CAN interface and cannot be controlled by the VCU. If your donor vehicle is pre-2016, you will need an alternative cabin heating solution.}}

For supported (2016+) units, the heater communicates via CAN and requires a separate VCU parameter assignment. Refer to the openinverter wiki for the current CAN message IDs and parameter settings.

----

== CAN Communication Verification ==

With 12V applied and CAN connected:
* Check <code>invstat</code> in Spot Values — should show non-zero when inverter is communicating
* Check <code>temphs</code> — should show a plausible temperature
* If no communication: verify <code>inverter</code> parameter is set correctly, check CAN bus assignment, verify 500 kbps baud rate, check twisted pair CAN wiring with 120Ω termination at both ends

----

== Known Issues ==

'''Outlander front unit CAN parameter value changed between firmware versions.''' Always verify against the current openinverter wiki before setting this for the front unit — the deprecated value 6 (used before V2.17A) will not work correctly on current firmware.

'''Rear unit bug fixed in V2.17A (May 2024).''' If using the rear unit, firmware must be V2.17A or later. Earlier firmware had a bug that prevented correct rear unit torque control.

----

== What's Next ==

* '''A01''' — Regen Tuning
* '''A02''' — Charge Control & Popular Chargers (Outlander OBC detail)

----

''Source: openinverter.org wiki | Damien Maguire / @Evbmw video series''<br>
''Last verified against firmware: V2.30A (August 2025)''
